---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

<!-- FIXME Lea's drawing -->

> Everybody falls, and we all land somewhere.
>
> Robert Charles Wilson, *Spin*.

Among other places, I spent a year in Japan. As my stay came to an end,
friends often asked if, or when, I was returning to \"my country\", my
*o-kuni* (お国). Each time the question came up, I found myself
struggling to find an answer. Indeed after living \"abroad\" for ten
years, I am no longer sure where this \"my country\" is located for me.
So I decided to begin a journey to find out, and to write a blog about
it.

My original plan was to take three months off work and cycle the length
of Japan, following the blooming of *sakura* (桜), the cherry blossoms,
as they propagate northwards throughout the spring. I had planned the
road in careful detail, but then 2020 struck, with the coronavirus
pandemic and some more personal setbacks. I cancelled the flight.

So I did take three months off work, but at my parent\'s home, in the
house where I grew up. During this time, I could have worked, albeit for
free, but something in me called for something new. So I wrote
*[Confinés au Groenland](http://cyclingho.me/confines-au-groenland/)*, a
series in French about glaciological fieldwork in northwestern
Greenland, based on my own experiences and field photographs.

\"Well, you can always cycle *to* Japan\", the colleague who drew the
gorgeous card above had suggested. When June came and the European
borders began to open up again, my bicycle touring gear had been readily
packed for three months. So I cycled out of my door to Belgium. And then
to my grandparents in the French Ardennes. And then to friends in
Switzerland. And then on.

The blog\'s title is inspired by the novel by Alaskan writer Lynn
Schooler *Walking Home*, a novel about glaciers, photography, and Japan,
incidently. I decided to write in English although it is not my first
language, so please excuse grammar errors and shortcomings. I speak
French, German, English, a bit of Swedish and Japanese, maybe still some
Vietnamese, Python, photography and the language of love. Feel free to
comment in any of these.

## Cycling east across Europe

View my complete cycling route at [ride with GPS](
    https://ridewithgps.com/collections/8301?privacy_code=YPTzB9GVzpTdzrut).
