---
title: Cycling along the Ionian Sea coasts of Epirus and Arcania
date: 2020-10-10 16:00:52.000000000 +02:00
categories:
- Cycling Europe
tags:
- Greece
header:
  image: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50444254946_287a679bc8_b.jpg
  teaser: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50444254946_287a679bc8_w.jpg
---

I woke up once again from my improvised camp site on the promenade deck.
The neon lamp above my head was still shining bright, but the wind had
stopped and the engine sound gone down. The ferry route ran along the
steep coastline of the Albanian Riviera and then through the narrow
strait with the island of Corfu, and I suddenly remembered that I really
wanted to see those places, just to get a feeling of continuity.

## Docked in the dark and dulled by dawn

I took a look at my phone. It was three in the morning, and the ship was
passing by
[Sarandë](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-in-coastal-laberia-or-the-albanian-riviera/).
So I walked to the other side of the decks to see the land, but of
course it was dark, and all I could distinguish were a few lights on the
shore. I definitely could not recognize the town where I had spent three
nights waiting for my Covid test results. Then there was a gust of wind
from the west, or perhaps the ship turned to enter the strait, but when
I came back to starboard, I had to pack my gear in rush as the deck was
suddenly getting soaked in rain. Then I gave up any hope to sleep more
and went to sit in the cabin, where I was surprised to see the bar
opening half-an-hour early. Except that it was half-an-hour late. After
cycling for three months towards the raising sun, I had just entered a
new time zone. I was one hour closer to Asia. But I wished I had crossed
that invisible line on the bike, not on a ferry boat.

It was still pitch dark when the ship docked at the port of Igoumenitsa,
and passengers were called to go down to their vehicles on the lower
deck. I got on the bike and cycled out of the ship onto a vast and dark
expanse of asphalt and concrete. I had slept neither well nor enough.
The sky was starless and I understood from the rain drops hitting my
face that it was cloudy. A single man stood in the night and made sign
that I come forth, then asked for my \"PLF\", my Passenger Locator Form,
the on-line form I had been filling over and over again over the last
couple of days. He vaguely looked at my phone and then pointed to some
direction in the dark: \"OK, Covid test\"! I followed two motorbikes in
front and we suddenly all found ourselves out of the port and at the
entrance of the motorway. \"Is that it?\" I asked myself. Was I in
Greece now? Was it so easy after all? Then the motorcyclists apparently
spotted something in the dark because they turned back. So I followed
on.

Two young persons with minimal protection stood next to a small table by
one of the closed exit gates. A black thrash bag had been set-up on a
small office chair in the alley, and passengers were queuing for the
test, parking their cars wherever there was space. In Igoumenitsa, the
random Covid test imposed by the Greek authorities was apparently more
voluntary than random, and you really had to look for it. But because it
was free, and because there were no more tourists than about a dozen of
us, it all worked out well. I never heard of the results afterwards, and
thus assumed that they were again negative.

After I made sure that all five banks in town would rip me off a
two-and-a-half withdrawal fee, I picked up euros and sat at an
early-opened bakery-cafe until day light came revealing heavy grey
skies. The regrets I had had in
[Brindisi](https://cyclingho.me/cruising-the-adriatic-sea-to-brindisi-and-back-again/)
were a mere a appetizer for what I was feeling now. I did not feel like
cycling at all. Had this been another day and place, I would probably
have ordered another coffee and taken out my laptop to write my blog
until the rain lessened. But I did not feel like writing either. The
double overnight ferry-crossing to Brindisi and back was a serious cut
in the continuity of my travels. I felt like I had just given up on the
last 3800 km and was starting it all over again. I wanted to give up
cycling. I wanted to give up writing my blog. Had I anticipated it would
disturb me so much, I would certainly not have boarded the ferry in
Vlorë.

I took out my phone to look once more at the maps. The detour through
North Macedonia and Bulgaria felt much shorter than it did a few days
earlier. What was 800 km and a few mountain passes to stop me? But it
was of course too late to go back. So I checked the weather forecast for
a change. Three days of rain and headwinds. Then I looked at the maps
again. I quickly calculated that if I had cycled eastwards from Albania
towards North Macedonia, I would have been in Ohrid by now. So I checked
the weather forecast for Ohrid. It was colder there but there were
tailwinds and less rain. Besides, the touristic lake town would have
made a perfect place for a rainy break of a few days. Then I looked at
the maps again. I zoomed in on the little blue dot that showed my
current location, and I zoomed out again to see Sarandë, Kakavië and
distant Brindisi. Of course I *knew* where I was: Igoumenitsa, Greece.
New country, new alphabet, new time zone. But the issue was, I could not
*feel* where I was. I think the best word to describe my feelings is
this: I was disoriented.

All that because I had made a stubborn promise to myself to reach the
Aegean sea side by the end of the month. I swore to myself that I would
never again listen to my mind over my feelings, that this would be the
last mistake. Or had I listen to my feelings after all? I was not even
sure. I complained a bit about my situation to two German tourists I had
met the previous day in Brindisi and approached for the only reason that
their were the first people I met wearing the show-your-warming-stripes
face mask design by Ed Hawkins. They had taken the daytime ferry and
woken up early this morning to catch a bus to the mountains. They had
their own little story of 2020 travels to Greece, which they had first
attempted overland, before being turned back at a border in eastern
Europe (I think it was Hungary) and driving back more a thousand
kilometres to Berlin to make a passport for their infant child. In any
case, I eventually did the only thing I could possibly do. I got on my
bike and began cycling in the rain.

## Ruminating regrets on rainy roads

I left Igoumenitsa to the south, meaning to cycle the coastal road, but
was immediately greeted there by a blast of headwinds a new curtain of
rain. So I backed up towards town and headed inland along the
preliminary course of Eurovelo 8, the European cycling route from
Andalusia to Athens that I had been roughly following since
[Rijeka](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-about-croatias-krk-island/). I had
to dig deep into my bags to fetch my rain pants. It was the first time I
used it since, I think, cycling out of the Alps and down into
[Bled](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-through-the-julian-alps-and-slovenia/),
two months earlier. The rain followed along as the road began climbing
up into the hills. I did not have a clear plan of what I would do once I
reached the Aegean Sea. All I knew was that I wanted to settle on one of
its islands for some time, which could be anything between two weeks and
three months, and do some writing. Preferably somewhere where summer was
still on the program for this year.

The road ran parallel to the motorway, only with a few more ups and
downs and wiggles. It was not particularly beautiful, but
extraordinarily quiet for being so close to a major port. I made it up a
to a little pass, where I could see the island of Corfu in the distance,
though it of course looked different from that angle than the island of
Corfu I had seen from
[Sarandë](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-in-coastal-laberia-or-the-albanian-riviera/).
The landscape was greener here than in Albania, which suggested that the
rain was not entirely coincidental. At the same time though, strong
fragrances of sage and mint conveyed memories of sunnier days. A local
later told me that if you would come to Epirus for two weeks, you would
probably experience one week of sun, and one week of rain. I realized to
my dismay that the sky had begun to clear seawards. I felt like one of
these bad-mood comic book characters condemned to carry a stormy cloud
of dark thoughts over their heads wherever they go.

My mood on the bike is always inline with the weather, but I always
wonder which of both is the chicken, and which is the egg. Does the
weather control my mood, or is my mood changing my perception of the
weather? In any case today\'s weather was very bad, my mood was very
low, and it did not matter much to me which was the cause. I was stuck
somewhere between the future and the past, torn apart between dread and
regrets, unable to get back to where I was here and now. So I tried to
picture my situation as some kind of really bad hangover, because
hangovers eventually fix themselves like magic. Maybe I had had an
overdose of coronavirus-related border crossing forms and regulations,
got into a fight with a corrupt policeman who insisted that I should try
Bulgarian booze, then passed out, and somehow woke up here on the shores
of Greece. And as we all know, the morning after is too late for
regrets, I should just be getting on with the task at hand and life
would eventually become bearable again. But still, what if I had just
cycled to North Macedonia\... No hangover then.

## Home of Hades or the Hellenic hell

I tried focusing on the new card in my map holder instead. I had decided
to put a little bit more effort into Greek that I had done with
Serbo-Croatian and Albanian. During the last hour of the ferry transit I
had begun listing a few practical words on paper, so that I could have
them at hand while cycling. I also thought learning some Greek was fun,
because Greek uses a different alphabet, yet somewhat similar to the
Latin one and arguably familiar to anyone who studied maths. But even
more interestingly, Greek is the oldest living language of the western
world and it bears ramifications into many European tongues.

For instance, I discovered that the word νύχτα (*níkta*) in καλινύχτα
(*kaliníkta*, good night) looks a lot like the English night, while
σιγγνώμη (*signómi*, excuse-me) sounds a lot to me like \"hey, I am
signalling myself!\" My pedalling machine is called a ποδήλατο
(*podílato*), I embarked on a long ταξιδί (*taxídi*) across Europe and
sleep under a σκηνή (*skiní*). So when I passed by a sign which said
καλό ταξίδι (*kaló taxídi*), I knew it did not mean \"let\'s call a
taxi\" but \"have a good trip\". Especially since the English
translation was written just below. Many road signs here are translated
to English, which almost seems to have been adopted like a second
language.

Then for some reason it came to my mind that the old name of Greece,
*Hellas*, sounds a lot like the English word \"hell\". This, as I later
found out, is entirely fortuitous, as \"hell\" is a Germanic word more
closely related to cellar and hole than Hellenic. But of course, every
good adventurer goes to hell at some point in their adventure. This is
typically achieved by paying and trusting a somewhat obscure character
to get you on a boat across a dark expanse of water. Which is actually a
pretty good description of how I had travelled into Greece. So here I
must have arrived in my Hellenic hell.

I was actually approaching the Acheron River, which is, in Greek
mythology, the river over which Hades carries the souls of the dead into
his kingdom. And in fact it was raining like hell, there were more muddy
swamps than beaches on the road side, and cars drove here devilishly
fast. Small frogs adventured onto the wet road and jumped out of my way
by the hundreds as I came close. The less lucky ones had already been
turned to pancakes by faster vehicles, their tiny fingered legs
quartered into flimsy starfishes onto the asphalt, their silky white
bellies forever facing the cloudy sky. These chewy carcasses made
disgusting squishy sounds when I failed to burst their tiny skulls with
my wheels. Anyway, Hellenic hell.

There were more dogs here than in Albania. I had had a talk with Simon
about angry dogs in Sarandë, and gave a try to the technique he
suggested to fend them off, which was to slow down or even entirely stop
cycling. It is quite scary to put a foot to the ground when one or
several dogs are barking and showing teeth within biting distance from
your calves, so I was really hesitant to do so in the beginning. But
after I managed to tame my fears, this has worked surprisingly well. In
a few instances, stopping the bike and putting a foot to the ground was
actually enough to calm the dogs who would just happily troll back home.
More often, the dogs have instantly backed off at least a couple of
metres and stopped in hesitation, as if suddenly wondering whether this
was a friend or a foe. Then I would try to speak to them, sometimes in
French, and more often in Japanese, because I really miss speaking
Japanese, and my ability to speak it has waned a lot since leaving
Japan, but I feel that the dogs don\'t mind. So I would say things like
\"犬さん、こんいちは。人です、大丈夫です。大丈ー夫。。。大丈夫だよーー！\"
And of course the dog would systematically reply \"ごごご！\" [Go, go,
go](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-in-inland-laberia-or-the-long-way-to-greece/)!

## Poseidon\'s pique in Preveza

After 60 km of inland cycling and a second minor pass, I was faced once
again the Ionian Sea. The seaside was full of beach bars, restaurants,
hotels and rental apartments, of which about one place in ten was open.
It was the end of the season. I must have read the forecast wrongly,
because there were very strong wind from the west, hitting the coast and
then turning south, pushing me along with great force. The Ionian Sea
was roaring, producing waves unlike anything I had seen on the Adriatic
Coast. The weather was changing all the time. I would pack my
sunglasses, and five minutes later the sun would be back, and it would
begin to rain at the same time. I soon reached the campsite where I had
promised on my entry form to stay. I was not sure whether the place was
opened but it was only mid-afternoon, and with such winds it would be a
pity to stop cycling. Besides, the coast was rather wild and it looked
like I would easily find a quiet camping spot. The instruction was to
reduce social contact for the first twenty-four hours in Greece so I
thought that I could not really go wrong with wild camping.

So I let the wind push me down and sped my way south to Preveza, where I
could do some shopping. This is where I realized that the 30-km wide
lagoon to my left was not a lagoon but a gulf, and the land bridge that
I was planning to cycle on was not a land bridge and in fact not even a
road bridge but an undersea tunnel. I don\'t like undersea tunnels, but
I have cycled some in Norway, so that would be fine, I thought. Except
that this was not Norway but Greece, and the tunnel was forbidden to
bicycles. At this point, I could almost see the face of Poseidon, Greek
god of the seas, storms, earthquakes, horses, and car-only undersea
tunnels, rising out of the stormy waters and laughing hard at me, its
trident jiggling in wiggles in the wind. Suddenly I understood why the
Eurovelo 8 made this funny loop around the bay. The mouth of the
Ambracian Gulf is only 600 m wide at the narrowest, and I could sea the
sun set on the mountains opposite where I was planning to set up camp.
But the way around by bike is a 150-km long loop. A two-days ride. And
the only way out of town for now was north, backwards, and upwind. Oh
well, Hellenic hell.

There was a campsite outside of town but it was soon October and like
most campsites in I saw it was closed. It took me great effort to cycle
the first 10 km north, after which I finally found a water fountain, and
long band of pine trees by the shore which made, except for the wind, a
very beautiful camping spot. I was exhausted from my long day\'s ride
and from the lack of sleep following the ferry night, too lazy to cook
something, and made do with cold foods.

On the next day I woke up, as usual, a little before sunrise, and did
not feel in much better shape. The wind and waves had diminished though,
and after I had slowly packed my gear, I spent a few hours on a deserted
beach bar facing the sea, trying to reinvigorate myself with a swim in
the waves and a coffee whose price tag would have easily fitted the
streets of [Zurich](https://cyclingho.me/taking-a-break-in-zurich/), or
perhaps the
[Albanian](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-along-the-coastal-plains-of-illyria/)
countryside if you removed one zero. While Poseidon seemed not very
supportive of my travels, as Odysseus I seemed to benefit from the
favours of Aeolus, keeper of the winds. The headwinds announced by the
weather forecast eventually happened, except that their were not a bad
thing after all, since the only direction where I could possibly go for
now was north-east and thus downwind. So began the long loop around of
the Ambracian Gulf.

After cycling for a while on busy roads in straight lines, where traffic
was quite scary at times, the course of the Eurovelo 8 turned onto minor
roads through wetlands on the northern shores of the Gulf. While the
winds were no longer playing along, the first part of this was actually
quite pleasant. I even stumbled into a few flamingos, and I took a break
on the road side to look at them walk the sea swamps with the fashion of
cross-country skiers, as if floating on the mirror-flat waters of the
wetlands. The animals were so gracious that I thought I must have
finally cycled out of the Hades\' kingdom. Then came the prickly pears.

## Prickly pears pick my paws

There had been nothing to eat on the roadside for days now. The fig
season had come to an end, blackberries were all dried-up, and the
pomegranates were still green. So I thought I would give a try to the
cactus fruits. They looked dangerous, but I knew they were edible. I had
contemplated them along the way for a while now, and here by the swamps
they were so fleshy red, and they were so many of them\... I thought
should give it a try. It could not be that complicated to pick a prickly
pear. I certainly would figure that out. When I got closer to the
cactuses I saw that there were areas of smooth red skin between the
spines just large enough for my finger tips to fit in. So I took out my
knife, carefully picked one pear and cut it in half. The fruit was full
of seeds but the orange flesh in between was sweet and juicy. I was
careful not to ingest the glochids, the tiny yellow needles that peopled
the thin skin of the fruit, about a millimetre in length yet so thin
that they are barely visible to the naked eye, especially when then
begin to mix up with the orange flesh.

This worked out well for a few bites. But then I felt some spiky thing
on my lip, so I promptly reached up to my mouth to remove it. The feast
came to an abrupt end. Suddenly there were glochids everywhere: on my
fingers, on my lips, on my tongue, and on my palate. I threw the fruit
to the ground, and nearly put my hands to my mouth a second time, before
remembering I had done it seconds ago and that this was a really very
bad idea. But then I also realised that there was also nothing else that
I could do. Everything I touched had been transformed into invisible
cactuses. My tongue was a cactus, and my lips were full of tiny thorns.
So I bit the bullet as they say, but not too hard, and grabbed the
handlebars, also not too hard, and cycled on, hoping this would fix
itself like magic.

An hour later though, nothing had fixed itself like magic. Besides, the
cycling route, which I followed on my phone, was getting more
complicated. The first part of the wetland ride had been smooth albeit
partly unpaved, but here it turned into a complicated succession of left
and right turns in the maze of the delta. Every other road was unpaved,
and most of them were fine until after a kilometre or two there appeared
a chaos of fallen bamboos or large ponds of sticky mud on the way. I
always had to stop to look at the maps on my phone, and for every new
thing my fingers touched I could feel a thousand tiny needles moving
under my skin.

Besides, this part of the gulf was exceedingly dirty. Greece is
generally very littered but the amount of trash spread around here in
wetlands was well beyond obscene. Entire shelves and sofas had already
begun sinking in the muds of the swamp and laid half-buried among the
bamboo. Damp mattresses, electronics and house appliance, and desolate
amounts of plastic were scattered about the delta providing a ready-made
decor for a zombie movie. And then there were the dead animals. Dead
animals are a common occurrence on European roads but I had never seen
so many as in Greece. Birds, hedgehogs, exploded turtles, frogs of
course, foxes with their upper jaw biting the asphalt, half-dogs with
fix friendly faces and flies feeding on their guts, cats whose
popped-out eyes I wish their children owner never see, unidentifiable
hairy headless black remains of mammals, more atrocious smells coming
from the bushes, suspicious hips below abandoned towels you would never
want to know what they hide\... Which is maybe a good place to write,
that almost every time I see a dead animal on the road, and this happens
a lot, I wonder if I will end up the same way. They remove the human
bodies though, and in Greece you even get a miniature orthodox-style
chapel on the road side. Which is cool. Except that they are way too
many of them. And that the motorists drive way to fast to see them. But
I see them all.

I could no longer bear with it. I stopped on the road side, took out the
tweezers I was suddenly very glad my Swiss knife included, and begun
removing the glochids from my hands one by one. All those I could see,
which was not all of them, but already a good many of them. Then I
booked a hotel room in the first village beyond the delta, so that I
could have a mirror, and do the same thing with my tongue and lips in
the evening. The sun was setting on the wetlands, and bugs were coming
out in the stinky air. The night was forecasted to be rainy, and the
place felt like a great cemetery of things and beings for kilometres on
end. I definitely did not want to sleep here. By the way, the French
name for prickly pears is barbaric figs. How accurate. Alright, Hellenic
hell.

## Additional adventures around Arcania

I woke up from my hotel room in Menidi feeling very much better. I could
still feel a handful of invisible glochids anchored in my fingers and
tongue, but this was next to nothing in comparison to what I had to deal
with on the previous day. There was a tiny scar on my tongue where I had
bled after removing a glochid yesterday, but besides that I could see or
feel no signs of infections. There was more rain and wind in the
morning, but I ended up spending much of it in the cafe underneath my
hotel, where I finally begun writing my blog again, and talked for a
while with one of the villagers in German.

The rain was perhaps not so bad after all. There were new blackberries
coming up, and some were already ripe. Soon after I began cycling, I was
4000 km from
[Lille](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-northern-france-and-belgium/), on a
road bordered with litter on the one side and prickly pears aka
barbarian figs on the other, under the rain, deep into the Ambracian
Gulf. I ate lunch in Amfilochia and while I could head south and inland
from there, I decided to continue cycling along the Eurovelo 8, which
mostly followed the tortuous Ionian Sea coast and circled the Acarnanian
Mountains to the west.

The southern shore of the gulf was nothing like the northern one. The
coast was both steeper and more jagged, and the road that followed it
kept turning north and south and going up and down little coastal
passes. In late afternoon I finally reached the last of these hills
overlooking the beautiful coastal town of Vonitsa. From there, I could
once again see the other side of the bay, as well as the several islands
that dot the outer part of the gulf. I waited to see the face of
Poseidon coming up out from the seas for a new joke, but nothing
happened. I had finally circled the Ambracian Gulf. I could have set up
camp around Vonitsa, and probably should have done so, but I wanted to
cycle a few more kilometres for the day, and I had spotted a little bay
to the south were I wanted to sleep, so I cycled on.

The road passed by another wetland, where I could see a beautiful
sunset. After the little town of Palairos, where the road was busy with
scooters, the coast became both steeper and more remote. And the road
went up and up above the sea. That night I cycled well after dark, but
the moon was nearly full and the road almost empty of cars. After a long
downhill I finally reached the bay that I had spotted, but both roads
leading to it were barred with private property signs. A little later
though there was another bay though, where miniature olive terraces
provided almost perfectly flat ground for camping. It was eight thirty
when I stopped cycling and that made me feel like a night owl. The
remains of a small campfire were surrounded by a little wall of
carefully piled rocks arranged into a semicircular wind shield, which
would be a perfect place for cooking.

I was preparing for strong winds and perhaps more rain overnight and was
particularly careful when setting up the camp. It is only after I was
done that I realized that the foul smell of piss and dung that filled
the air, and that I had attributed the general sheep excrements coating
of the Balkan peninsula, seemed to come exactly from that little
fireplace that was now half-a-metre from my tent. Having a closer look
at it, I realized that the pit was habited by at least two different
species of many-legged wormy creatures and a little collection of flies
and spiders. It was not clear to me if this little ecosystem fed on
remains of food or excrements, or if perhaps both formed part of a more
advanced food chain. But I was too tired to move the tent. Whatever,
Hellenic hell.

For a long while I could hear the constant barking of two dogs in the
hills. I was really surprised that they could spot me from such a
distance given the smells that surrounded me, but they probably did,
because the barking stopped some time after I went into the tent. Or
maybe they were just barking at the moon. Or maybe it was Cerberus, the
three-headed dog of Hades. It had always worked very well so far. That
night I slept facing the narrow side of my tent, which I always find a
little claustrophobic, but allowed me to put a bit more distance between
the stinky firepit and my nose. In addition and as I do every night, I
hung my Japanese lucky charm to the roof of my tent and asked it once
again to take a good care of me while I sleep.
\"まよけちゃん、よろしくお願いします。\" It has always worked very well
so far.

The wind and the rain came in the morning, and I was glad that I had
pitched my tent carefully after all. A dog\'s nose came sniffing under
the rain fly while I had my breakfast, but when the animal realized
someone was inside, it ran away promptly, apparently even more scared
than I was. I took out my laptop and sipped Turkish coffee, sorry I mean
Greek coffee, under the tent, while the rain passed. When the sun came
out from the clouds, and I came out from the tent, I suddenly remembered
that I was after all camping in a remote little inlet of the Ionian Sea
coast, just fifteen metres away from a picturesque gravel beach and
turquoise waters that seem to come out straight from a tourist magazine.
The waters were fresh but very clear. When I began taking down my camp
though, more rain was already on its way. I ended up packing a wet tent
and leaving the site in haste as a thick curtain of winds and rain
approached from the west.

The coastal road that followed was very beautiful. The weather was ever
changing, producing dramatic lights over the sea and the many islands
dotting the coast. I ate lunch in Astakos while watching torrents of
rain falling onto the docks. Then the road went over a quiet little pass
and down onto yet another coastal plain, that of the Achelous River
delta. Tailwinds pushed me straight across it, and to the island-town of
Aitoliko, where I hit the Gulf of Patras. Over the last three days, I
had been riding an inverted S-shape route around first the Ambracian
Gulf and then the Arcanian Mountains. But here I was done with the
zigzags of the Ionian Coast and my road, still following the Eurovelo 8,
was turning east towards Corinth, and the Aegean Sea.

I cycled the last few kilometres to the bigger town of Missolonghi, but
did not stop here. I had booked a hotel room in Tourlida, not because I
needed one for the night, but because I really wanted to sleep there and
feared the place would be a bit small, and perhaps windy, to camp.
Tourlida is a village of fifteen souls located on a flat island at the
edge of the Missolonghi Lagoon, which is reached by a five
kilometre-long driveway stretching straight south into the Gulf of
Patras with the sea on both sides. There are churches here that appear
to float on the water, and the houses are built on stilts, sometimes a
mere twenty centimetres above the water surface.

Tourlida as I expected, was more of a paradise than a hell. Definitely
not the place to be in case of a tsunami. Definitely the place where I
would bring a girl if I wanted her to fall in love with me. There I saw,
without realizing it, my last seaward sunset in a while, for I was now
leaving the west coasts for lands of the rising sun. And it was in fact,
one of the most gorgeous sunsets I have ever seen, the yellow orb of the
sun disappearing into faraway cumulus clouds and then behind the distant
mountains and islands that dotted the Gulf of Patras, ephemeral rays
poking through the clouds, reflecting onto the waves of the Ionian Sea
and colouring around the houses on stilts pinned about the lagoon.

## The route (4 days, 383 km)

-   [26/09/20 Igoumenitsa -
    Preveza](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/56857723) 118 km
-   [27/09/20 Preveza - Menidi](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/56857724)
    81.6 km
-   [28/09/20 Menidi - Kandila](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/56953050)
    91.1 km
-   [29/09/20 Kandila -
    Tourlida](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/56953051) 92.2 km

## Photos
