---
title: Cycling on Pag Island and to Zadar
date: 2020-08-16 16:00:00.000000000 +02:00
categories:
- Cycling
- Europe
tags:
- Croatia
header:
  image: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50218785766_3e812475fa_b.jpg
  teaser: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50218785766_3e812475fa_w.jpg
---

One more thing happened on Rab. After more than two thousand kilometres
of cycling, I finally opened one of the six blank notebooks I had
carried all the way from
[Lille](http://cyclingho.me/cycling-northern-france-and-belgium/) and
began to write. I was not sure what I would do with it but somehow hoped
to turn it into a book, someday. I also invited a friend of mine who is
aspirant (but experienced) writer to have a writing retreat together in
Greece. I hoped she would say yes, but also realized it was not
everyone\'s ambition to give up their jobs and stable lives just to go
enjoy themselves on the beaches.

## The old olive trees

After a ten-days long stay in
[Rab](http://cyclingho.me/taking-a-break-in-rab/), I finally said
goodbye to my hosts Milorad and Ljubica. The previous days\' wind had
grown to a halt, announcing a hot day of sun in the Dalmatian Islands.
Milorad explained that the sea water on the seaward side of the
Dalmatian Island was particularly salty, that it was good for the skin
and that I should not shower after swimming. I told him this was good
news, because I did not intend to shower much in the coming days. Before
I left he said again, \"and don\'t forget, go slowly\", which felt like
some of the best advice I\'ve been given on a tour. And the kind of
advice I need to hear many times. So I cycled down to *Cafe Moderato*
for a last cappuccino while waiting for my ship. When I saw the size of
the boat and the number of people who waited (or rather hurried to board
the unstaffed boat), I thought the pilot would refuse my bicycle. But
three bikes including mine were attached on the front railings and the
bags went onto the roof.

I landed in Tovarnele, the small harbour downstream the village of Lun,
in the heat of the day. The ride would start with a 100 m uphill and I
knew there was nothing to do for a couple of hours but to swim, eat,
swim again, nap, and of course swim again. Then I put on long sleeves
and trousers and began the ascent. This was my new cycling outfit and it
worked very well. At first the clothes felt hot, but I quickly realised
they were more efficient at keeping the sweat on my body to cool me down
as I took on speed, rather than letting it directly evaporate in the hot
Adriatic air. My thoughts though, were spinning round and round.

I used my smartphone to check the weather across Europe. If it was hot
here by the Adriatic Sea, most of France was actually experiencing a
scorching heat, some of the villages by the Belgian border reaching a
mind-blowing 38Â°C. Like the previous year. Temperature, I thought, is
one of the things we know best of our planet. Some of the temperature
records in Europe are almost two hundred years old. Actually, measuring
temperature is incredibly easy nowadays. To measure rainfall or wind is
much harder, but anybody can go to the local store and buy a
thermometer, or even an automated recorder and let it run for a couple
of years. Measuring temperature is very easy, that is, unless you want
to measure temperature on top of the Greenland Ice Sheet. And the
temperature on top of the Greenland Ice Sheet is of course a rather
practical thing to know these days.

To start with, you need to go there, which is an expedition. Of course,
you would want to measure temperature for more than just a couple of
summer days. One needs measurements for a full year, or preferably a
couple of cold years, a couple of average years, and a couple of warm
years. Since nobody wants to spend winter on the ice sheet, you also
have to design instruments that resist very cold weather, fierce
katabatic winds, and snow piling up in winter and melting down in
summer. Oh and I forgot, there is no solar energy for a quarter of the
year. Lastly, you need to come back. In August 2020, Konrad Steffen, a
scientist who had pioneered automated temperature measurements on the
ice sheet, went to Greenland, but did not come back. He had fell into a
crevasse.

I had learned the news from an ex-colleague during my mid-day break. By
then, I had left academia for almost half a year, and did no longer
consider myself much of a scientist. But the news touched me more than I
would have imagined. It is certainly another peculiarity of academia, I
thought, that the same colleagues who are fiercely competing against one
another, also share a very strong sense of community. At that moment,
the community was struck with grief. It was not so much that the man was
a renowned scientist and director of a leading research institute in
Switzerland. He was also a charismatic, classy-looking bearded man that
I had met in person, if just a few times, and did not want to think of
in a crevasse.

One thing that disturbed me, is that Konrad Steffen had been to
Greenland many times. This accident could have happened to nearly anyone
I had shared office with in the last five years, I thought, or to myself
of course. I wondered if it was safer to do fieldwork on a Greenlandic
glacier or to cycle on a busy road in Croatia. I wondered if collecting
climate data was worth risking human lives. I wondered if journalists
were not entirely wrong after all, when they made us look like
adventurers just to bump up their audience charts.

I wondered who or what was guilty. Had there been security shortcomings
in the field? Most likely I thought, because researchers don\'t have a
TV crew budget to hire mountain guides for every outing, or enough arms
to carry around both scientific instruments and the necessary gear to
pull someone out of a Greenlandic crevasse. If they are additional arms
on the field, it is usually because new research projects have been
funded. Was the man\'s passion for glaciers to blame? Or the institution
he worked at? Or the lack of government funds for field security? Or the
stubbornly competitive academic environment, where financial security is
so tightly bound to the amount of data one brings home? It took me about
twenty-four hours to realise that all these were useless questions.
There was nothing to think of. We glaciologists all *knew* that glacier
fieldwork was dangerous. It was just a different thing to *feel* it.

In Lun, there was an olive garden. On the southern slope of the island,
olive trees grew and reproduced naturally. The trees stood still, like a
group of wrinkly old men looking at the sea from the terrace of an
Italian coffee shop, undisturbed by the ever-going seasonal song of the
cicadas. The karstic ground looked like crumbles of a giant Emmental
cheese turned to stone. Some trees were spinning like corkscrews, some
appeared to be stuck in a slow dance paced by the centuries, others yet
seemed to float above the ground, like if even soil erosion was faster
than the trees\' growth. *Slowly, slowly*, had said Milorad. Every here
and then, a younger tree had popped straight up from the ground, like a
skinny adolescent feeling uneasy in the middle of the elderly crowd.

I walked for about half an hour until I reached the oldest tree, which
is thought to have two thousands years. I tried to imagine how many
tourists had passed here. The tree had survived empires, countries and
wars, the medieval warm period and the little ice age. Before leaving
the place, I made a wish that the olive tree would outlive myself. I
wished it would also survive the coming centuries of hot weather we have
been setting up for it, and hopefully make it into cooler times. I left
the place content. For the olive trees, human lives must feel like
little more than raindrops in mid-air. Maybe humanity itself did not
matter so much after all. Nature would certainly come up with something
else.

## Slow and back on desert island

The cycle road went on onto the ridge line until it plunged back to
Novalja, another Croatian seaside tourist hub, where I hurried into the
water, had dinner and watched the sun set. After Novalja, the road
became much busier, giving me more matter to think of life and death. I
had planned to camp wild when I ran onto Camp Svetih Duh, a quiet
campsite by the sea shore. I came from above so I could see from the
heights that the place was designed with more common sense than the ugly
parking-like campsites on
[Krk](http://cyclingho.me/cycling-about-croatias-krk-island/), that it
was not overcrowded with camping-cars, and that there was, here, on this
arid island, grass.

The next morning, I woke up early, and set up my new cycling routine. I
cycled the first few kilometres just in swimming suit because I wanted
the rest of my body tanned. Of course, I had a rational reason for it.
The scientific part of me thought it would be much more practical in
these latitudes to get my skin a little less white. But above all else,
I just thought it was cool. I enjoyed feeling the fresh morning air full
with sea spray flowing around my body. A few kilometres from the camp,
the road was closed due to a small (slow-moving) landslide. There was a
one-metre step which was a bit hard to push my loaded bike into, but I
had the road to myself for a few kilometres. I found it so cool to cycle
in swimwear that I cycled on into the town of Pag in this apparel, and
then straight into the sea for my third bath of the day, and then
straight from the sea to a beachside cappuccino. From then on it was
long sleeves and long trousers for the rest of the day.

Midday was approaching when I reached the incredibly dry, southern part
of Pag. I noticed that I did not suffer so much from the heat as on my
first days in Croatia. Going slowly helped a lot. Going slowly helped me
to stay cool and not loose to much water. Going slowly left me with more
energy to pay attention to car traffic on busy roads. Going slowly
allowed me to jump in the sea to cool down whenever I felt like it. I
did not bother waiting to dry up, cycling wet allowed me to keep cool
for a few kilometres. I had also stopped worried my Brooks saddle might
get wet. After two major [Alpine
passes](http://cyclingho.me/cycling-across-the-swiss-alps/) and more
than a thousand kilometres, the thing was barely softer than when I had
bought it in Zurich. I just protected it with a miniature towel, but
sometimes thought maybe I should wet the leather on purpose.

Another of my great fears when bike touring is to forget things along
the way. This is one of my special skills. In 2018, I lost a notebook
when looking for my bike on a multi-deck overnight car-ferry in Japan. I
called the company and harbours multiple times (telephoning in Japan is
an art) but never found it back. I have lost a few towels and helmets,
keys, wallets, etc. For the last couple of years, I even carry two pairs
of sunglasses, just because I have a long-term record in sunglasses. But
so far I had managed to cycle more than 2000 km without loosing any
single tiny item. This was some kind of a personal score, so I was
taking pride in it and hoped to keep it up for a bit longer. But when
cycling through the desert of Pag, I suddenly realised something was
missing. It was not a crucial item, though recently I had begun to use
it to protect my saddle after bathing. Worst, it was a souvenir that I
could not imagine giving up. I cycled back about 10 km, carefully
looking at the opposite side of the road. I was about to reach the last
place where I thought it could have been when suddenly it was there. My
mini-towel was taking a nap on the dirt road, still waiting to be ran
over by the first passing car.

By mid-afternoon I cycled out of Pag Island and back to the mainland.
The road was busy with apparently hurried drivers. I think I spent more
time looking into the rearview mirror than in front of me. I moved my
arms in all directions to explain to some car drivers that they should
put more distance between us or break a little. Sometimes it worked, but
not all drivers seemed to agree that my life was perhaps more important
than a few extra minutes on the beach. Why did people need to drive so
fast from place to place? Why did some of them need to carry half their
house in a camping-car? Why was it that jump-around car tourism was
still promoted as mainstream kind of tourism these days? *Slowly,
slowly,* I wanted to tell them.

## Let me introduce myself

I was approaching the town of Zadar, so I booked a room there for three
nights, planning to use it as a hub to visit some of the islands nearby.
But when I looked closer at Dugi Otok on a map, I thought the island
looked so beautiful I wanted to spend at least one night tenting there.
On the other hand Zadar turned out to be the largest city I visited
since Ljubljana. At first, I regretted to have booked the room for so
long. But then I decided to take the chance to be there to do a couple
of city things.

First, I replaced the tires on my bike. The front tire especially had a
few deep cuts that worried me, one of them responsible for my lately
flat tire in
[Ljubljana](http://cyclingho.me/cycling-through-the-julian-alps-and-slovenia/).
The rear tire did not look as bad but I decided to replace it too. I am
not sure what is the expected life expectancy of bike tires, but I was
definitely quite please about the Continental Tour Rides. Both tires had
about 5000 km of touring and a couple of day rides, and ever since I had
bought the bike I had had only one flat. It was fun to think that the
tube in my rear tire was now actually older than the tires themselves. I
upgraded to Schwalbe Marathon tires, the *de facto* gold standard of
bicycle touring.

The other thing that I did was to prepare and to print business cards,
which I\'d been thinking of for a while now. Ever since I had lived for
a year in Japan, I somehow really wanted to one day have my own *meiji*,
this tiny item that, when formally introduced says without a doubt
\"look, this is what I am\". Rather than \"I\'m French but the French
think I\'m not, and you can\'t say my name correctly but it\'s OK cause
nobody around me can\" or \"I\'m a scientist, I mean part-time. I mean,
they *pay* me part-time, and only for a few more months. I mean, it\'s
normal for a scientist, we work out of passion. I mean, they do.\" Now I
have my own business card, with the logo I designed in Rab, with my own
design, my own personal email, and my own personal websites. If we meet
on the road, I will give you one.

## The route (2 days, 115.6 km)

-   10/08/20 [Rab - Rab](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/54441330) &
    [Tovarnele - Kodan](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/54441329) 35.5 km
-   [11/08/20 Kolan - Zadar](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/54442051)
    80.1 km

## Photos
