---
title: Cycling up the Saar Valley and the northern Vosges
date: 2020-07-02 20:53:03.000000000 +02:00
categories:
- Cycling
- Europe
tags:
- France
- Germany
header:
  image: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50208464158_91997839ce_b.jpg
  teaser: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50208464158_91997839ce_w.jpg
---

When I began bike touring in my early twenties, I was a student on a
tight budget. I had a cheap bike, camped mostly in the woods, and
occasionally stopped in a campground for a shower. Ten years later, my
knees and butts tended to hurt more, but I had assembled enough savings
that I did not have to feel bad about waking up feeling refreshed from
my hotel night in Merzig. Instead of heating water in my alcohol stove
while the tent dried in the morning sun, I went down one floor to enjoy
coffee served at the table.

## Where nature meets industry

With the ongoing coronavirus pandemic, everyone circulating in the hotel
had to wear a face mask. I was impressed by the professionalism of the
staff. I took advantage of the hotel\'s internet and electric plugs to
process recent photos and to write until the checkout time. It is there
that I published my first blog post.

It was late morning when I checked out and stepped on the bike. The
skies were still gray and a few drops fell from time to time. The bike
route along the Saar River was not particularly scenic but very
comfortable. The road was flat and wide enough to accommodate cyclists
and pedestrians. There were signs everywhere, including temporary signs
for two sections under repair. Every now and again a large map displayed
cycle paths in the surroundings and a topographic profile of the main
cycleway.

Upstream of Saarelouis, the Saar River valley opened up and the skies
cleared. The road passed by several impressive factories, and I
marvelled at how urban planning merged industry, city life and nature.
In the state capital of Saarebrücken, the riversides was busy with
activity. While riding through this landscape I realized how communal
wealth is important to people\'s quality of life. I could feel how
access to nature and recreation grounds for all, regardless of the place
or standard of living, has the power to hold a society together, even
when individual wealth is unequally distributed. If more places on Earth
were built like this we would certainly do better.

While thinking of all that I suddenly pedaled over a bilingual sign on
the ground. I was once again back to France. For the second time in two
days, rain started to fall right when I crossed the border. And again
the infrastructure appeared poorer on this side of the border. Factories
were older and had not been renovated for years. The bike path became
narrower but still very enjoyable to cycle on, especially since I was
nearly alone. Most other cyclists were Germans adventuring into the
neighbouring country without even bothering trying to speak French.

## Sleeping among fireflies

After somewhat late cycling I reached a camping I had spotted on the
map, well into the Vosges Mountains. Simple but well thought, this was
my favourite camping on the trip so far. The owners were friendly and
the view fantastic. A man in his sixties came ask me where I cycled from
and we ended up talking late into the night, until we couldn\'t see our
faces anymore. He was apparently not impressed by my evening meal, an
unequal mixture of pasta and a trappist cheese that had travelled for
three days in my bags. The cheese looked like melted raclette before I
started cooking it and now formed a sticky layer at the bottom of the
pot. He was a regular customer of this campground for thirty years. He
was Dutch and somehow we ended up speaking German, which was good for my
practice. We talked like philosophers about following one\'s heart or
following others, about people who take and those who give, and how
people who give can fill a place with positive energy. He thought this
campsite was such a place, and I guessed he is right. When I finally
returned to my tent, fireflies were peopling the bushes and the grass.
Needless to say that I slept well.

## Down to Alsace

The next day I crossed the Vosges mountains. The Northern Vosges are
much lower in elevation than the southern part of the range, where I was
originally planning to cycle through. In fact I had completed much of
the ascent on my way to the campsite the day before. After reaching the
plains I turned south towards the outskirts of Strasbourg where my
cousin lived. Today for some reason my butts began to hurt badly. I had
lunch in a deserted restaurant in a deserted town. A Belgian-Japanese
family sat at the next table. A flood of memories from my one year of
living in Japan came back. But I was too shy to speak Japanese with
them.

I approached my destination in mid-afternoon and decided to wait for my
cousin in the *Ravito des cyclos*, a seemingly popular café by the canal
accessible only by feet or bike. It is maintained by a bike touring
couple, but they were very busy serving customers on this Sunday
afternoon, so I did not have time to discuss with them. By evening, I
was quite exhausted from the wind and rain, and really glad to get a dry
bed at my cousin\'s place.

## The route (2 days, 178 km)

-   [Merzig - Hinsbourg](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/51976387) 107.8
    km
-   [Hinsburg - Duttlenheim](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/51976384)
    71.4 km

## Photos
