---
title: Cycling along the coastal plains of Illyria
date: 2020-09-17 09:00:35.000000000 +02:00
categories:
- Cycling Europe
tags:
- Albania
header:
  image: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50351599377_f240ec117b_b.jpg
  teaser: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50351599377_f240ec117b_w.jpg
---

I entered Albania fearing this could be a dead end. At least until
September 15, the land borders to Greece were closed to
\"non-essential\" travellers. I had first planned to enter Greece by sea
in Corfu, but later realized while doing a bit more research about it in
Kotor that the ferries from Albania were not running.

## Sports cars and horse carriages

After crossing the border into Albania, my attention was simultaneously
caught by a giant billboard advertising a five-star hotel for *only* 130
€ a night and a 10 year-old girl running up to me to beg for money. A
few kilometres down the road, a man who had seen me cycle by caught up
on a motorized tricycle to try hard to sell me a beer. A little further
still, I met my first ever horse-car since leaving France. And by the
way, in case you ever wondered, even a fully loaded touring bicycle is
faster than a horse car. Right from the border with Montenegro, Albania
appeared to me as full of contrasts. There were decrepit concrete
buildings facing fenced garden villas, horse carriages sharing the road
with shiny black Mercedes and Audis, mosques neighbouring churches on
the towns squares, opposite to bars advertising that \"you can\'t buy
happiness but you can buy beer and that\'s kind of the same thing\" or
some other creative slogans.

Since I was not in a hurry, I began my stay in Albania by spending three
nights at Camping Legjenda in the southern suburbs of Shkodër. The
camping was certainly more than I needed, but it was beautifully
designed and cheaper than a hotel room. The camp site was built around a
central circular pool, and supplemented with a small hotel, bungalows
and a restaurant. Everything was lushly vegetated and carefully designed
to a multitude of tiny artsy little details by the owners, a retired
English teacher and her husband who seemed to be both artist and
architect. It felt like a luxurious camping, and I must admit that I
spent two days there behaving like the guest of some hotel de luxe,
moving little more than between my tent, the restaurant and the pool.

On my first night, I met and dined with Roman and Susan, an Austrian
couple who had cycle a similar route to mine. They planned on going to
Greece if that was possible, and otherwise take a ferry to Italy where
they would cycle back northwards. The camping had a few more overnight
guests, but for most of the days, I had the entire place to myself. The
owners were trying to make up for the lack of guests by using the time
for renovations and construction works. After a morning coffee, the
atmosphere was at work, and this was a good motivation to do some on my
own. So I did a long overdue maintenance on my bike, cleaning the chain,
making sure that none of the screws holding the mudguards and especially
the racks were rusting, and adding a drop of oil where it felt needed.
Then I tried to catch up on photo work and blogging.

When the third morning came, I left Shkodër southwards under strong
tailwinds. At first the traffic felt a little chaotic, and the large
dusty boulevards I felt more like the streets of Hanoi than the rest of
Europe. But I quickly became used to the new rules and eventually felt
much safer in Albania than for instance in Croatia. Car drivers were
apparently used to share the road with slower traffic, and almost
systematically slowed down before overtaking me. Horning was very common
though (as if cars are not loud enough) and it took me a bit longer to
get used to that. The quality of the roads was very variable. I cycled
the first few kilometres on a brand new and largely empty highway, then
ended up on a road that had once been asphalted but of which only few
patches remained, before falling back on a beautiful secondary road
through the Torovicë valley. I had lunch in Lezhë, then I wanted to see
the sea for it had been a while. So I cycled to the nearby coastal town
of Shëngjin.

There were multiple camping places along a sand bar stretching out from
the town but apparently all of them were closed or had otherwise been so
little attended they now looked more like trash dumps. In the city,
large hotel and apartment complexes were being built massively and just
about anywhere, engulfing a previous generation of cuter businesses in
their high concrete walls. I felt as if *De Panne* or some other ugly
beach resort was just popping out of the ground, all at once and right
before my eyes. I hesitated to wild camp or sleep on the beach, but felt
the place was too urban for it, and so I ended up taking a hotel room
instead.

## A long day in the sun

The next day was one of my hardest since leaving France. I quitted
Shëngjin early and cycled back to and through the town of Lehzë in heavy
traffic, then took a quieter country road following the edge of the
plains. There was a strong, hot wind coming down from the mountains to
the east. In Milot, the nearly 1 km-long rail-and-road bridge over the
Mat River was in such poor condition that its bumpy asphalt apparently
sustained several competing car repair shops. I cycled through the town
of Laç where, as in much of Albania, the primary business was *lavazh*,
followed by its derivatives *lavazh tapiceri*, *lavazh bar*, *lavazh
restorant*, and *lavazh kafe*. So I stopped in a cosy-looking, shady,
leafy *lavazh kafe*, not to get nice shiny looks for my blacktacular
Surly LHT (yes it\'s really called so), but only for the *kafe*.

As I was trying to greet all men who turned their heads to look at the
strange visitor, so everybody sitting in the cafe, a person whom I later
understood to be the owner invited me to sit with him. He spoke very
little English but I could understand that he had worked in Italy and
later came back to Albania to open the cafe. I explained that I aimed to
travel to Greece but that the border was currently closed, to which he
replied \"ah, no corona\". As many others in Albania, he believed that
the coronavirus was little more than a political machination. I tried to
explain that we had had several cases in the family, and that it was a
very real sickness. But no, \"no corona\". This got me angry of course.
At the same time though, I could understand how people here felt this
way. The country had been little affected but Europe was enforcing
strict restrictions. While I had travelled all the way from France with
only an ID card (I did not use my passport even once), Albanians could
not go travel anywhere without an expensive PCR test, or a cheaper fake
PCR test, and certainly not into the EU. So I changed topic. Eventually
the owner insisted to offer me the two espressos. Albanian hospitality.

In Thumanë I left the foothills and turned west, onto a road which I
thought was paved but eventually became so rocky and bumpy that even the
[Arenberg](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-northern-france-and-belgium/)
cobblestones would have been a smooth ride in comparison. After a few
exhausting kilometres, I was stopped by a farmer, who spoke only
Albanian, but compensated by speaking lots and lots of it. I understood
a very little percentage of what he said, but he was so talkative that
it made for an almost decent conversation. I could communicate that I
had cycled from France and was on my way to Durrës, that I was not a
farmer but used to work in a school (sort of). I understood that he was
shocked to find a cycle tourist here in the middle of the fields, that I
should go on and meet the asphalt again (good), that I would need to
push my bike up hills (how true) before seeing the beach and turning
left to Durrës, and that I must have had good calves to cycle all the
way from France, but maybe some issues with my brain (again spot on).

The climb that came next was only 200 m high but I think it was the
steepest I had yet encountered. I managed to cycle some way up, and had
to push my bike for the rest, stopping often and sweating like a
fountain. I passed by a few villages in the hills where everyone stared
as I cycled by, all their heads rotating in pace, for when Albanians
stare at you it is not a sneaky Scandinavian kind of stare, or an even
more discreet Japanese kind of stare, but a frank, opened-eye,
facing-you kind of stare. I was feeling tired, regretted this little
hook through the countryside. I had chosen to avoid Tirana fearing heavy
traffic there but maybe I had better cycled through the capital after
all.

And so I realised that for the first time on the tour, I felt some kind
of homesickness. This was a feeling I had last experienced when living
for one year in Japan, and never before on a bicycle tour. I missed a
more familiar place. Yet at the same time, I could not pinpoint exactly
where that place was, for I had spent the last ten years moving around
the world according to the various job opportunities that showed up,
never quite feeling home anywhere. Also for the first time, I considered
to stop cycle touring. It was not really that I wanted to give up.
Instead it somehow occurred to me, with a sudden and clear certainty,
that bike touring would just bring me this far. I could certainly keep
doing it for a bit, perhaps should, but at some point, I would need to
use a different vehicle, at least for a bit. I also remembered a
conversation I had with a friend in early July. She asked if I was gone
cycling around the world, and I replied to her that I first aimed to go
once around my head. To this she cooed in admiration for she said it
sounded much more adventurous, and that I should certainly write a book
and *please* let her know if I ever succeeded. I finally cycled down
from the hills hungry and thirsty and stopped at the first opportunity.
Yet another pizzeria.

The day was not yet over though. It was almost mid-September but the
Albanian skies remained desperately blue. I was approaching the suburbs
of Durrës on a tiny road when, suddenly, without any kind of warning,
there was a right angle turn and I was on the motorway. A real four-lane
motorway with cars driving 100 km an hour and a concrete fence in the
middle. I had planned to cycle *across* the motorway and onto a
secondary road on the other side but it did not occur to me that there
would be no bridge. After a few kilometres of madness, and meeting a
scooter driving against traffic I found a tiny exit. I cycled over a
bridge where a bus honked its way through pedestrian traffic with doors
open, probably just in case someone would like to jump in.

I was tired, had a headache. I made a last stop in a dusty alleyway
bordered by equally dusty pines on either side. The remains of a fence
and a concrete cabin suggested it perhaps lead to an old communist
building. I was surprised to notice I had nearly cycled 90 km. No doubt
I was tired. Besides, I was thirsty, but I thought the water from the
morning\'s hotel tasted bad and I was cautious about drinking it. After
a few more kilometres in the city, I finally reached the Durrës
seafront, an endless alignment of beachside hotels, bars and pizzeria
curving along Albania\'s longest beach. By then, I just wanted a room
and a bed. I stopped in a bar to get internet access and ended up
sleeping in the hotel right above it.

## Pine forest and sandy beaches

The next day went better. For much of the morning, I cycled on secondary
roads parallel to the coastal motorway, sometimes busy with local
traffic, sometimes largely empty despite looking almost new. At some
point, the road turned into a narrow dust lane, so that restaurants that
were once on its side now faced an aluminium guardrail and traffic
running 100 km an hour. I cycled another shabby-looking road-and-rail
bridge in Rrogozhinë, then turned again left on a secondary road through
coastal plains and rural villages, that led into the town of Divjakë and
the nearby Karavasta Lagoon, both of which are part of the
Divjakë-Karavasta National Park.

The most interesting part of the park are a series of quickly evolving
sand dunes that have been colonized by high pine trees, and now dam the
lagoon. They are connected to the town by a 2 km-long road and a
beautiful cobblestone sidewalk through the swamps. I stopped at the
visitor centre where I met Johnny, a Dalmatian pelican with a broken
wing that had been tamed by the park. Picnic tables had been set-up
under the pines and a guide took me through the small exhibit and
pointed the main sights of the park. The National Park was in such
contrast with chaotic city I had experienced the previous day, that I
wondered if I was still in Albania. I asked the guide if I could camp in
the park, to which he recommended that I pitch my tent in the yard
around the visitor centre. Since I was not also guaranteed that Johnny
would be OK with it.

It was still mid-afternoon so I cycled to the outermost sand bars where
I had a swim and approached a group of wild pelicans as close as felt
not stressing to them. Then, I cycled to the end of the sandy road,
which led to a small tower with views on the lagoon, where other birds,
flamingos, could be seen in the distance. I came back to Johnny\'s yard
right on time to watch the sun set from a much taller, concrete tower
built overlooking the sea by the visitor centre. Before setting up my
tent, I talked a bit with three guys around my age, drinking a beer
while they smoke weed, each of us enjoying our own culturally approved
drug. After that I had polenta with *kaçkavall*, a delicious Albanian
sheep cheese similar to the Italian *caciovallo*, and a canned tuna
salad. Johnny was apparently very curious about the later, and came out
of the dark dandling on its huge palmed feet towards me. For a minute I
wished I was better at deciphering pelicans\' facial expressions. I was
not sure how to react when the dinosaur came knocking his 40 cm-long
beak on the picnic table.

Johnny\'s bodyguards on the other hand, a group of four or five dogs
trained to watch over the bird\'s security, were quick to adopt me as
another pelican in the garden. One of the dogs in particular apparently
dedicated its night to protect my tent from all kinds of dangerous
creatures, such as cars, motorbikes, birds, horses (not sure where they
came from), humans, the neighbour\'s dogs, and some other threats that I
could not see. I did not sleep much but you would have clearly no chance
to steal my bike that night.

For much of the next morning, I cycled very pleasant country roads from
Divjakë to Fier. I was prepared for a few kilometres of gravel roads but
found asphalt instead. I was caught up by Simon, the first bicycle
tourist I met since Shkodër. Simon had cycled all the way from Germany
to Sweden, and the from Sweden to Albania, but today he suffered stomach
ache and stopped in Fier for the night. From Fier to to Vlorë I had
little choice but to cycle on the main road. The quality of the road was
again very variable and correlated to traffic, but all in all it was a
pretty smooth ride. Shortly before Vlorë, the road went up through olive
gardens in the hills, where it would have been easy to set up camp. The
road was border with other impressive trees, with peeling trunks and
thick sturdy leaves, which I later identified as eucalyptus.

Vlorë was the last Albanian port where I could possibly take a ferry to
Italy. I settled in a gorgeous little flat in the hills above the city
centre, and decided to wait for news about the Greek border crossing.

## The route (4 days, 312 km)

-   [11/09/20 Shkodër -
    Shëngjin](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/56143347) 67.2 km
-   [12/09/20 Shëngjin - Durrës](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/56143348)
    91.6 km
-   [13/09/20 Durrës - Divjakë](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/56143349)
    71.3 km
-   [14/09/20 Divjakë - Vlorë](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/56143350)
    81.5 km

## Photos
