---
title: Cruising the Adriatic Sea to Brindisi and back again
date: 2020-10-06 10:00:00.000000000 +02:00
categories:
- Cycling Europe
tags:
- Albania
- Greece
- Italy
header:
  image: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50421413167_8052e28b49_b.jpg
  teaser: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50421413167_8052e28b49_w.jpg
---

Two ferry boats were anchored in the port of Vlorë. I cycled to the
seaside to look at them, then paused on the handlebars with a
last-moment hesitation, as thoughts carried me back one year past. I was
in another port, facing another ferry that I had hesitated, until the
very last minute, to board. It was April but snow patches still covered
the docks of Otaru, and I was having a really hard time to leave
Hokkaido, a place that I had called home for a year. I had consoled
myself with a promise to come back, but all my attempts had failed.

*Note: I have moved parts of previous post here for balance. I am back
on track with photo work, but still a bit late in my writing.*

## To board or not to board

Today, the stakes were of course different. The previous evening, I had
finally come to relax from my one-way conversation with the Greek border
police in Kakavië and to slow down after the racy ride through the
Albanian mountains. I had then informed Jean-Miguel and Simon that they
did not need to attempt the Greek border or to take expensive Covid
tests. They now both planned on cycling eastwards to North Macedonia and
Bulgaria, and then Turkey. I had then spent the rest of the evening
looking at photos of beautiful Lake Ohrid and the seemingly gorgeous
road that led to it through the mountains of Albania until I fell
asleep. I had not considered this route earlier, but I was now very
tempted to follow them.

Yet I still aimed to cycle to Greece. I was committed to reach the
Aegean Sea by the end of the month. Taking the road east through North
Macedonia and Bulgaria was quite of a detour to start with, but what I
feared the most were new border complications and administrative delays
on the way. So I got back to the guy I had talked to the previous day
after all, whose job as it turned out, was to buy a ticket for me
on-line and to walk over to the company\'s office, now that I could see
which it was, for check-in. I was curious to why there were two boats
docked in the port, so I asked where the second one was going. To which
he replied \"no. That one is not good. This ship is much better, you
will see.\" Two ferries competing for the same deserted line on the same
timetable, and half-a-dozen boots competing to sell tickets to these two
ferries. What a funny world we lived in.

The boarding process was quite complicated. I received identification
and temperature checks, and had to take my bags through a scanner. At
nearly every occasion, I asked the police, the port staff, and the crew,
whether ferries ran from Brindisi to Greece. To which they all said yes,
though they also asked \"why did you not take a ferry from Sarandë to
Corfu?\" Or \"why don\'t you just cycle to Igoumenitsa?\" Even them
apparently, had a hard time to keep an overview of the current travel
restrictions. So I explained the whole story again to each of them.

Eventually, I went onboard and I walked up the stairs to the passenger
decks where a crew member helped me to fill up an entry form for Italy.
After a few questions, he wrote the last concluding remark: \"I am going
home. I am transiting in Italy.\" I warned him again that I planned to
travel to Greece afterwards and asked if this could be a problem. To
which he answered \"well, I don\'t know. But don\'t worry, you can go
home anyway you like.\" He could not be more accurate.

The ship was full of signs in Norwegian that were completely
out-of-place but that nobody had cared to remove. They said things like
\"30 percent on all but clothes and accessories\", but the shop had
neither clothes, accessories or anything else to sell. Another sign
permanently advised that \"the restaurant is fully booked\" where there
was clearly no risk of that happening. I walked upstairs again to the
sun deck and sat against the town of Vlorë thinking \"ciao, Albania, or
maybe see you soon. Let\'s see how this goes.\" Four hours later, the
ferry was still in the port. The schedule apparently did not take into
account the fact that the contents of each truck had to be manually
checked by dogs and people.

## On the wrong side of the sea

\"I\'m going home. I\'m transiting in Italy.\" I handed my entry form to
the Italian police. A few minutes later, the officer came back with my
documents and wished me \"*bon voyage*\". Nobody asked if I had been to
Montenegro in the last two weeks, or whether I had taken a test. I was
back into the European Union. Thank you Italy for making this simple.

The whole Brindisi experience was quite weird. The ferry had docked in
the Italian harbour with a delay of three hours and it was almost
midnight when I eventually cycled into town. Accommodation prices here
were twice those on the other side of the sea, but I had not risked
booking any before making sure I would be allowed to disembark. As for
wild camping, I could choose between industrial areas around the port,
and the airport north of the city. Eventually though, I found a little
hotel where I could check-in late and even push my bike into a
ground-floor room. I connected to the internet and, before midnight,
still managed to register a new online entry form for Greece with
information I had picked up at the port, planning to arrive there two
days later. Then I fell asleep exhausted, no longer used to stay up so
late.

I woke up to a breakfast I had not realized was included in the price of
my room, a delicious cappuccino, and a very strong feeling to be on the
wrong side of the sea. From the first minute of the day, I regretted
that I had not changed my mind in Vlorë and headed eastwards to North
Macedonia and Bulgaria after all. There was a TV in the breakfast room
showing images of snowfall, probably in the Alps, which was not
surprising for late September, but somehow felt surreal. Besides, the
ferry transit was a painful reminder that, with a bit of oil and money,
the distance I had travelled in three months would be easily covered.
But it was not even any of that which bothered me. What bothered me was
the impression that I had not come here. I had been transported here,
and this felt very different. Because after three months of bicycling,
the ferry crossing just felt like black magic.

In Brindisi, it was of course not snowing, but the skies were grey, and
a few drops fell every now and again. Italy, the country that I always
kept coming back to, and systematically welcomed me with rain. There
came other news that morning. News that I had been dreading for a while,
and then stopped caring about. News from my last application for a
university job, which I had submitted five months earlier. The position
had been opened by an exiting group with which I would easily find
common interests and complementary skills. It was a two-years contract
with prospects for a permanent employment at a dynamic university, with
good funding opportunities and some of the best university working
conditions in the world. But none of that were my true motivations. The
main reasons I had applied to the job, was that first, friends had
pushed me to do so, certifying it would be a good place for me. Second,
and most importantly, I had met a few people from this group at
scientific conferences over the years, and everybody I knew there seemed
to have a good heart. Which is, by the way, not the typical thing to
write in a ten-page application for a university job reviewed by an
external panel.

I had been thinking about the job a lot in the early part of my cycling
tour and eventually decided for myself that, in the unlikely event that
I would be preselected, I would decline it, explaining all of the above,
along with the fact that, at the present moment, I did not feel in an
emotional state to readily move alone to yet another new place in the
world and begin yet another new life there. This, at least, is what I
had been thinking while I riding my bike under the sun, but of course I
did not know how I would react, and feel then, if I was confronted with
an interview. The question did not come up though. Out of twenty-four
applications considered, mine was among the five who were directly ruled
out as incomplete.

A few more applicants were out-listed as being specialized in the wrong
field, but the remaining selection was largely based on crude statistics
of how many papers the guys had published in the last few years and how
many times they had been downloaded. Which did not surprise me, but
still felt odd to see written black on white. While I was a bit
disappointed to know that I ranked so low, I was glad in a way, that the
matter was settled. I would not need to bring this uncertainty along to
Greece. It was another item I could take off my mental luggage. I
probably should have been applying to many more jobs if I had really
wanted to know where I ranked. But this rejection would be the last in a
while, maybe the last in my career. A little voice in my head said:
\"hey, lazy bum, now you are on your own\". And I was fine with it.

## Camping on the decks

I think I felt more uneasy there than anytime previous on this tour. I
cycled to the port to buy a ferry ticket. Everything here was well
organized. In Brindisi unlike Vlorë, there was *one* ferry terminal
building, and *one* booth for each company. There were signs all over
the place pointing to the direction of *Grecia*, always accompanied with
a little reminder that I was welcomed back to *Albania*. And yes, I was
in fact tempted for a while to just go back to familiar-feeling Albania,
no matter how ridiculous that was, cycle back up the homely streets of
Vlorë and from there up across the mountains to Lake Ohrid and North
Macedonia. But instead I lined up with the truck drivers in front of the
counter for Igoumenitsa. The employee who sold me the ticket to Greece
appeared very annoyed that I did not speak Italian, and refused to give
me cabin prices before I had chosen what I would book. She seemed to say
that it did not matter which date was written on my entry form as long
as I had one. Nevertheless, I booked a ticket for the overnight ferry to
be sure to arrive in Greece on the correct day. She then insisted that I
should be ready to board at seven.

I cycled back to town for another cappuccino. The streets of Brindisi
were surprisingly quiet, but perhaps this had something to do with the
drastically reduced ferry traffic of these days. I was back into the
European Union, and in comparison with Albania everything here was
thought-through, organized and somewhat familiar. People spoke German,
English, and of course Italian, which I don\'t understand but is close
enough to French. But despite all that, I strongly felt that I did not
belong here. A demonstration if needed, that the feeling of not
belonging depends at least as much on one\'s state of mind as one\'s
environment. Since this was Italy, I ate a pizza for lunch, which was
evidently far superior to anything I had eaten in the Balkans. I tried
to convince myself hard that this delicious pizza was the reason why I
had paid more than a hundred euros in ferry tickets and hotel lodging,
because even that would feel more acceptable than the truth. But it did
not work. I had to come to terms with the fact that I had spent all that
money just to circumvent nonsensical travel restrictions, in fact even
putting myself at risk by using public transport.

A little before seven, I cycled back to the port, only to end up
watching long-haulers board the ship and beating away mosquitoes for an
hour and a half. When this was over, I had a beer on board with money
that could have bought me a small meal in Albania. The night was stormy,
and as soon as the ferry exited the port, it begun rocking so hard that
it looked like everybody on board was drunk. Passengers were few and
mostly truck drivers. The interior of the cabin was full of \"no
camping\" signs, so I went to sleep outside. I set up my sleeping mat on
the southern, downwind walkway, under a bright neon lamp and loud engine
noise, but shielded from the rain by the upper deck. On the positive
side of things, there was definitely enough ventilation here to feel
protected from viruses. In fact my mat and blanket would have instantly
flown off if I did not keep them anchored at all times. Somewhere
between Italy, Greece and Albania, in the middle of the flat black
watery world, I eventually found sleep in my noisiest, brightest and
windiest camp site to date.

## Photos
