---
title: Cycling through Alsace and the Black Forest
date: 2020-07-04 10:25:47.000000000 +02:00
categories:
- Cycling Europe
tags:
- France
- Germany
- Switzerland
---

My cousin and his partner had recently moved to a quiet town in the
western outskirts of Strasbourg. After spending one year in Canada, they
had come back to France where finding a job or getting unemployment
money had proven more difficult than expected, even more so lately with
the pandemic. As soon as practically possible they had moved to
Strasbourg for my cousin\'s new job and I was their first guest. I
decided to stay two nights at their place so that we could spend more
time together.

## Flammkuchen and gingerbread

I washed my clothes, filled my bottles of cooking alcohol and hand
sanitizer, the new bike tourist\'s must-have. We shared our frustrations
about the French culture : gender inequality, administrative drag,
constant need to judge and be judged by others. The days when we began
to wear face masks had been particularly strange to me. We had gone out
of the house and looked at each other in approbation or disapprobation.
Does this person wear a face mask? Should I do the same? Or should I
not, as to mark my disapproval? Sanitary concerns seemed almost
secondary.

But then we also agreed that at least the food was much better here than
in Canada. So we went out to the nearby town of Obernai to eat
Flammkuchen. The houses were in timber frames and the Flammkuchen
delicious. After dinner we went on a hill above town where the view
extended all the way across the Rhine Graben to the Black Forest in
Germany.

In July of 2007, I had gone for my first bike tour. Internet had
confirmed that it was not such a mad idea after all because others on
the internet did it too. I had bought a fifteen euros promotional train
ticket for the newly opened Lille Strasbourg TGV line, and decided to
cycle across the Alps. I had been cycling along the canals and rivers.
On my first night I had been dead scared, on the second I had woken up
from a tent covered in snails, but the third night went well so I had
decided that I might as well cycle on.

Since 2007, the cycling network in Alsace and other parts of Europe had
greatly improved. This time I was cycling a different road, the
so-called wine cycle road that follows the foothills of the Vosges
Mountains. Before leaving, I had taken a difficult decision: I had left
my mirrorless exchangeable lens camera at my cousin\'s place. The
Fujifilm X-T1 had accompanied me on several bike tours and multiple
hikes. It had been with me to Greenland, Japan, and many places in the
Alps. But it was also bulky, heavy, and overkill for much of my touring
photography. I had already ordered a compact camera in Zurich, thinking
of all the space I could save in my handlebar bag for snacks, wallet,
sunscreen, and face masks and sanitizer which were the latest addition
to my touring gear. But for a couple of days, I would have to use my
phone.

I had left my cousin\'s place after lunch, and the afternoon light in
the vines was gorgeous. But my ass was hurting, like if the day of rest
had had absolutely no effect on them. I stopped in a pharmacy, where,
skeptical, I was prescribed a cream against burns. I had aimed to sleep
in Colmar, but stopped in a beautiful small camping in the middle of the
vines in Bergheim. Then I ate Flammekuche again. This was becoming a
habit.

The next morning I realized my cycling shorts were stained with blood.
After feeling for a while like a young girl getting her first period, I
decided to try something new : cycling without them. And it worked. I
could still feel the burning spot, but the saddle was now pressing in a
slightly different place, a new fresh piece of pristine butt skin. Were
my shorts the issue? No, I had used them on several tours. When the pain
began to come back I realized something else : it was hurting less if I
cycled without pedal cleats. Actually my clipping shoes were the only
new piece of gear I used on this tour. So I decided not to use them for
the next couple of days.

Since this was my last day in France, I stopped for a coffee and
croissant in the beautiful town of Colmar. The region had been badly
hurt by the pandemic, but tourists were already filling the streets of
the idyllic town. It was July first, we had entered the second half of
2020, a year that had so far been largely negative for many.

From Colmar I turned east towards Germany. The Rhine Graben, the
intermontane depression between the Vosges Mountains and the Black
Forest, is fairly large to cycle across. As I cycled east I imagined
Africa to my right pushing up against Europe underneath, opening this
huge scar in the Earth\'s crust, that had been filled with sediments
from the Alps. In the middle ran one of the largest rivers in Europe,
the Rhine, and along it, the border between France and Germany border.
So I said goodbye to my home country and cycled one last time across its
borders.

## Black Forest black coffee

I woke up drowsy from a stormy night in Freiburg. I was lazy to go out
so I had coffee and breakfast in the tent. The skies were still gray and
more rain fell right when I decided to fold the tent. Too bad, I would
have to carry a wet tent above the Black Forest. I picked a minor road
that climbed in a deep valley north of Feldberg, the highest mountain in
the Black Forest. I was pleased to learn that the last part of the road
was closed to motorized traffic. Still feeling sleepy, I had a second
coffee in the last village. Then the road started to climb more steeply
in the forest. The Black Forest was my first mountain range. The road
was steep, but with mountains came something else. For the first time
since leaving northern France, I truly felt surrounded by nature. I
could hear no more cars, but the chirping of birds and the soothing
sound of a nearby creek.

The last part of the climb was steep. For the last few kilometers I had
to shift to the lowest gear of the Surly, hoping I would not meet
steeper roads in the Alps. Then I reached my first mountain pass,
Rinken, 1196 m above sea level. My body was calling for more coffee.
This was coffee addiction day. After the pass I decided to cut by
somewhat level gravel roads through the woods, to save a few kilometers
and along the way visit Feldsee, a glacial lake surrounded by steep
forested slopes on the east side of Feldberg. As far as touring bikes
can go, the place felt eerily quiet and remote. The mountain walls
disappeared in a thick cloud cap above the lake. The reward was well
worth the ascent.

Then there was the long descent along the northern shore of Schluchsee
and along quiet highland road where I was hoping to get my first view on
the Alps. But if the weather had cleared above my head, the southern
horizons were still filled with gray clouds. Eventually the road dived
into the steep gorge of the Schl√ºcht River, and I was surprised to
discover such steep topography outside of the Alps. I stayed at a
camping in Gurtweil just north of the Swiss-German border.

## Meeting friends in Switzerland

The next morning I crossed the border in Koblenz and entered my fifth
country: Switzerland. I had lived in Switzerland for four years and left
just before the pandemic. The weather was cloudy and chilly, not
particularly exciting. I cycled the 50 km from the border to Zurich
following the little red signs of the excellent cycling network. They
took me along the Rhine River, and then up onto the Zurich Oberland.
When I first saw the city, I immediately recognized the highest
buildings and Uetliberg to the right. The view was familiar and strange
at the same time: I had never seen the city from this distance and
angle, and I still had a hard time to realize I had come here by bike.

The weather was not really inviting to picnics, so I met my friends
Morgane and Marc at their place. They cooked a huge plate of pasta and
after that I would have fallen asleep if we did not have so much to talk
about. The last couple of months had been strange for all of us. I left
their place in late afternoon to cycle the last 30 km to Wetzikon.
Finally I had my first view on the Alps, or at least on the outer
ranges, dark mountain walls against a gray background of clouds. In
Wetzikon I was welcomed by another friend and fellow bike tourer, Yang,
who made a gorgeous dinner for my arrival, but forced me to shower
before collapsing on the bed.

## The route (4 days, 282 km)

-   [30/06/20 Duttlenheim -
    Bergheim](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/51976388) 54.3 km
-   [01/07/20 Bergheim -
    Freiburg](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/51976390) 73 km
-   [02/07/20 Freiburg -
    Waldshut-Tiengen](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/51976392) 71.1 km
-   [03/07/20 Waldshut-Tiengen -
    Wetzikon](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/51976394) 83.3 km

## Photos
