---
title: Cycling in East Tyrol and Carinthia
date: 2020-07-23 10:00:00.000000000 +02:00
categories:
- Cycling Europe
tags:
- Austria
- Italy
---

After the Dolomites, I began to more readily identify myself as a
long-distance cycle tourer. The status implied leaving much behind,
primarily relationships and job security. What helped, is that I was
progressively realizing that it was also inspiring to others. So I
became less shy about giving my direction, about explaining I wanted to
be on the road for a while, and to work along the way.

## Slowly downhill to Austria

Between Toblach and the next village, Innichen, there is a major water
divide, yet ancient glaciers carved the valley floor so wide and flat,
that there is no real pass. The cycle road went gently uphill, then
flat, then gently downhill. And then I was cycling along a little
mountain creek, a major river of the Eastern Alps, the Drava, which
flows into the Danube at the Serbo-Croatian border.

Tens of meters before leaving Italy came the time for my last pizza. But
the border pizza was disappointing and waiters seem to be in a rush. La
dolce vita, va bene, finito. I felt a bit melancholic crossing the
border to Austria. I was thinking of all the things I was leaving
behind: incredible mountains, a friendly cycling family, a pretty hiker
who thought it was cool to be a jobless, aimless cycle tourer, and of
course good pizzas\...

I had nowhere heard so much Italian before crossing the border to
Austria. For the entire way to Lienz, the road was busy with families
slowly zizaging their way down on the unpaved road. I thought they were
probably planning to go back up by train, for even if they cycled up as
fast as down, the return trip would take more than a day. I had never
used my trumpet horn so much as on the way down to Lienz. La dolce vita,
va bene\...

## A quiet little disco camp

I stopped at the tourist information centre in Lienz, where I directly
noticed that Austrians felt as corona-proof as the Swiss. Just as I was
getting again used to wear a face mask, again I was the only one doing
so. I obtained detailed, free maps of the Drava cycleway, a 500 km long
bike path from Toblach in Italy to Legrad in Croatia. Around Lienz the
road was well marked and well designed, though it lacked the liveliness
of the South Tyrolean cycleways. Meanwhile I was shocked how every
European country I went through had much better infrastructure than the
one I was cycling from, the home of the bicycle, France. I had been
surprised when Glauco and Julia told me of their poor experience cycling
in France. They had had trouble finding places to stay, eat, shop, and
even drinking water, which is often only available at cemeteries. I was
understanding better now, though it certainly did not make me want to
cycle home to France.

The person working in the information centre advised a quiet little
campsite by the side of the cycleway, which was also advertised as an
official partner on my map. So I thought it would be the perfect place
for bike tourists like me. The place turned out to be a huge campsite
with two swimming pools filled with sunburned kids. The majority of
guests were Dutch and apparently shared coronavirus invincibility with
the locals. Then there were loud Austrian or German pop songs to keep
kids busy while parents were drinking beer. I thought I would be much
better off in a quiet place in the woods. Besides, in my opinion German
just doesn\'t fit disco dance.

In the morning I discovered my first technical problem on this trip. I
had lost a screw holding the bottom clip on one of the front panniers. I
left the campsite early, just in case there was a morning session of
Austrian pop songs. I felt like making some distance. Looking at the
map, I noticed that the least-elevation road made a hook through
Tarvisio in Italy, and that if I cycled well I could maybe eat another
last pizza in the evening. For the first few kilometres, the cycle path
went through beautiful mossy pine forest where I thought I had rather
spent the night.

## The truly last Italian pizza

Cycling along the Drava was incredibly easy. The road was well marked,
mostly flat, and not too busy. In Sachsenburg I stopped at the bike
store where the owner was kind enough to give me a new screw for my
panniers. After that, the Drava River cycle path was joined by Alpe
Adria route, which goes from Salzburg to Grado on the Adriatic Sea. The
valley made a bend and for the first time in several weeks, the view in
the distance opened up to a clear blue horizon. I was making my way out
of the Alps. In my back though, dark clouds gathered announcing a stormy
afternoon. I met several long-distance tourers with itineraries roughly
similar to mine, cycling from Switzerland and the Czech Republic to
Slovenia and Croatia.

In Villach, I met Mira, who seemed to carry about as much luggage as me,
and had just decided to undo her 6-years-old dreadlocks by the side of
the cycle path. For a while the poplar pollens floating around the sides
of the Drava were replaced by bullets of hair flying in the air. Mira
fed me with bonbons and we had a good chat about our respective lives
and plans, or rather absence of plans. She had cycled here all the way
from Denmark, had another month to go but she envied me when I explained
I had no goal or time limit, and I saw myself a few years past.

In Villach, I left the Drava to cycle up on the Alpe Adria cycle path to
Tarvisio. I thought I was done with the rain but a new storm broke as I
approached Tarvisio. The landscape became again more dramatic as the
Julian Alps appeared under a ceiling of gray clouds. I had thought of
camping in the woods by the Slovenian border, but I was tired and
dehydrated, and regretted to not have stopped in Villach. Eventually I
opted for the lazy option of a hotel pizzeria in Tarvisio, that had
single rooms at a reasonable price. So I could also recharge my
batteries, and finish writing this post on the Austrian Alps.

## The route (2 days, 199 km)

-   [21/07/20 Toblach - Dellach im
    Drautal](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/52987794) 78.8 km
-   [22/07/20 Dellach im Drautal -
    Tarvisio](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/52987796) 120.2 km

## Photos
