---
title: Cycling about Croatia's Krk Island
date: 2020-08-02 11:00:00.000000000 +02:00
categories:
- Cycling Europe
tags:
- Croatia
- Slovenia
header:
  image: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50209332922_c683b61d86_b.jpg
  teaser: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50209332922_c683b61d86_w.jpg
---

The culture shock between Slovenia and Croatia was much stronger than
that between Austria and Slovenia. While sipping a last morning
cappuccino in the quiet campsite campsite among the hills in Pivka, I
did not imagine that I was headed to a completely different universe.
After a few kilometres on the bike, there was a last little pass, and
the road plunged into Adriatic Slovenia, and soon after, Croatia.

## Busy roads and five-star parking lots

The border between Slovenia and Croatia was my first staffed checkpoint
since leaving France. My face mask was very useful to queue in the
middle of exhaust gases until the identity control. Nearly half of the
cars waiting to cross the border had German plates. I did not really
understand whether the online form I had filled in Lubljana had any use.
After the border, the vegetation became more Mediterranean. I thought of
having lunch in the pine forests but I wanted to see the sea, so I
cycled down the last 400 metres of elevation on the increasingly busy
road, until abruptedly it stopped, and the landscape was all blue. I had
reached the Adriatic Coast, something I had looked forwards over the
last 2000 km. The sea below was deep blue, the sky was completely
cloud-free, and there were distant blue mountains on the horizon.

I picked-nicked on a busy beach where I took one of the last little
shady spots. Around me though, most others seemed to have opted to
expose as many square centimetres of skin as possible to the scorching
sun. I thought they were mad, but they probably thought the same of me,
cycling around with my 40 kg bicycle in the Mediterranean heat. A little
later, I was entering Rijeka on a busy construction site. The place was
not really photogenic, and traffic was queuing behind my bike, but I
found a little spot by the workers\' toilets to immortalise the fact I
was now 2000 km from my starting point.

Within a few kilometres of cycling along the coastline, I quickly
understood that the next 2000 km of the tour would be nothing like the
first part. The landscape had new colours, the light was different, and
it was really, really hot. For every slight uphill, my face became a
fountain of salty sweat running into my eyes. I was running out of
water. At the same time, I tried to keep my attention focused on the
motorised traffic, of which I wondered where it all came from. I had
been warned by other cycle tourists about traffic along the Croatian
Coast and indeed, to drive around your car looking for a beach appeared
to be a rather common summer activity in Croatia. The alternative was to
drive around your bike watching for cars.

I\'m often asked whether I am not scared while bike touring. There are a
couple of things that scare me, but the one thing that clearly makes the
top of the list is motorised traffic. In Croatia, cars and trucks seemed
in a rush to get somewhere, and often overtook me dangerously fast and
close. A few kilometres after crossing the impressive double-bridge to
the island of Krk, I was riding at 25 or 30 km/h in a downhill. I have
no idea what went into the truck driver\'s mind. There were a few horn
blows which sounded like friendly cheers, and then the double-trailer
passed so closed I was blown off the side of the road. Adrenaline rushed
in. My bicycle started swinging in all directions on the gravel, and I
called on all my strength to try to keep the handlebar straight.
Suddenly there was a large rock a few meters ahead. At this moment a
picture came back very clear into my mind. There was water spilling of
the mountain side in a blind turn. A cyclist had pushed the breaks at
the wrong moment and gone flying over the handlebars, landing
unconscious on the asphalt. It was a couple of days ago at the Fusine
Lakes. The woman in her sixties had been unconscious for a while and
apparently woke to a broken jaw, splitting blood on the pavement. I am
not sure what happened but my bike did not hit the rock. Not this time.
The truck driver went on like nothing happened. From then on I swore to
myself I would never take my eyes off the rear-view mirror on Croatian
busy roads again.

I had promised on the country internet entry form to sleep in Omi≈°alj. I
had a temperature shock when entering the campsite\'s reception, a tall,
air-conditioned glassy building which I thought must be one of the
coldest places in Croatia. After asking whether there remained space for
a small tent I was invited to choose between Gold, Silver and some other
precious-metal parcels, the cheapest option of which costed something
like 60 euros. I looked at the receptionist again, and again at the
price list, then the name of the place, *camping*, and again at the
receptionist. \"Really?\", I asked. \"Well, we have five stars\", she
replied. I tried to picture grassy green pitches and top-soft soothing
flowerbeds that would shape around my sore muscles better than a veteran
Brooks saddle. But according to photos I had seen, the ground looked
rather rocky. \"Well, no thanks\". I was too tired to ask what this was
all about. I left the place accepting that five-star camping places were
another mystery of life I would perhaps never elucidate.

I was exhausted and dehydrated, but I cycled another 10 km to the next
campsite in Njivice. This campsite had *only* four stars, and the
receptionist told me that I would pay *only* about 20 euros (saving an
extra 30) if I accepted to sleep in the *tent zone.* Not only was this
still one of the most expensive places I had slept at, but tent zone
turned out to be a small parking lot in the middle of the camping
complex so big, that even after going thrice to the toilet I still
struggled to find my way there. As if to ensure that guests would have
the worst possible experience, the entire place had been covered with
little white rocks that leave sharp marks in your tent mat. Actually I
could not even pitch my tent, so I had to sleep without the roof. The
place had been clearly designed as a holiday parking lot for camping
cars, and the primarily spoken language was German.

The only thing this parking had for itself was the Adriatic Sea, and I
must admit this was a huge plus. The water was about as warm and salty
as the liquid that had run down my body the whole afternoon, so it was
easy to get in, and the bath made me so much good I almost forgot my
anger. I went for dinner in the village, and ordered the saltiest dish I
could think of. The four-star parking also had a *lounge* with live
music. The musicians appeared to be talented, but bored to the core by
what they were playing. When I went back to my tent, I was suddenly glad
it wasn\'t pitched, for there was a bright street lamp right above it.
Another very strange design idea to which I had not paid attention. But
then I could just move my tent to a different parking place.

## Learning the beach cycling life

The next morning, I was apparently the only parking guest to enjoy an
early sea bath. In order to survive the Croatian heat, I decided, I
would need to change my daily routine. So far I used to have a slow
start in the morning, take a good break around lunch, and settle
somewhere in the early evening. I would try to set off earlier, avoid
cycling in the heat of the day, and aim for a quiet spot to camp at
night. Camping in the wild would not only allow me to avoid crowds but
also save me money to enjoy the local foods. This was settled matters,
and the morning\'s decision felt as crisp and sharp as the first light
of day hitting the rocky beach. What followed was an all different
story.

I still wanted to do a day tour of the island. So I packed all my gear,
had a chat with the receptionist about camping prices in Switzerland and
tenting on grass versus sharp rocks. \"But we have four stars\", she
argued. I kept it a secret for myself that I saw many more through the
open roof of my tent.

I cycled to the island\'s main, picturesque city of Krk. The primarily
spoken language was German, and they were restaurants at every corner. I
normally don\'t eat much meat but decided it was time to try Balkan
grill meat, which had teased my nose for a few days now. I ordered a
grills mix with chips. When the plate arrived I directly understood that
my afternoon\'s plan to bike and hike the island\'s highest point would
at least need to be postponed. The mountain was only 500 m high but with
this heat, its arid top seemed more distant than any Alpine pass.
Besides, the plate I had in front of my eyes contained more meat than I
typically ate in a month. But since I hate to waste meat, I ate all I
could, and then sweating like a steak, did the only thing I could think
of, which was to head for the nearest north-facing beach to cool down.

So I took a shaky forest road and ended up on a rocky shore with pine
trees, turquoise waters, and a view on the island\'s highest point. The
kind of place that probably fill the German tourist magazines, I
thought. Now I have to confess, the sea shore is a new environment to
me. Through work and holidays, I had been lucky to travel much around
the northern hemisphere, but mostly to mountains or cold regions, and
typically swam in lakes only when I could no longer bear my own smell.
In full daylight, the Adriatic Sea seemed live with hordes of little
things hiding in the sand. Now expert beach-holidayers would probably
have been the ones laughing at me if seen me so carefully entering the
water while looking at my feet.

I sat in the shade to let a few hours go by, swam again, and by 17:30 I
was beginning to cycle up the mountain. At 50 metres elevation I became
a shower of meaty sweat. At 100 metres my remaining drinking water had
nearly ran out. Since I did not want to finish as a dried piece of
tourist meat roasting around my steel frame like a cycle-kebab on top of
Krk\'s highest mountain, I took a left and cycled towards the town of
Vrbnik, which apparently hosts the world\'s narrowest street, and
stopped in the first bar where I ordered a full litre of sparkling
water.

I filled up my bottles and headed for a quiet inlet to set up camp. The
skies turned dark and the temperature dropped from hot to pleasantly
warm (in the downhills). I took a wrong turn on the way and ended up
again cycling up steep hills. Finally there was a very steep, 150 m
downhill to the sea, which I knew would be hard to cycle back, I was too
tired to look for another place. The site I had spotted was dirty, but
the view gorgeous. Night had fallen, but I had the little inlet for me
alone, and the rising moon was shining seawards. In place for dinner I
took a moonlight bath. There, swimming naked in the Adriatic waters, I
decided that beach cycling was cool afterwards. I would just need to
continue adjust my rhythm. Again, things did not go exactly as planned.

## No more grilled meat

Around midnight I woke up with a really bad stomach. I had time to get
out of the tent, dress up, shaky, and dig a little hole. The mixed
grilled had to come out either way. No, both. I woke up again two hours
later for vomiting the little water I had drunk in between. I spotted a
few shooting stars and began to worry how I would feel the day after.
When morning came I was very weak, and beginning to feel headache. I
wanted to take sunrise shots but had absolutely no energy for it. After
vomiting a third time, I managed to take a very careful bath which gave
me a bit of energy. Still, packing the tent and all took at least twice
the normal time. I felt miserable. I no longer trusted my water, so I
cycled to the bar 2 km from my camp, which was of course still closed,
since it was 8 am. So I used for the first time my water filter, to
filter the content of my bottles. After drinking a few tiny sips, I did
the only thing I could think of, which was to pick a shady spot and
sleep.

I woke up about two hours later surrounded by families enjoying the cool
hours of the day, which were basically over. Then I attempted to cycling
up the 150 m slope, where the morning shadows had already disappeared,
taking the slowest pace the bike allowed. I surprised myself when
reaching the top. I sat ten minutes in front of the supermarket before
deciding I was not in shape to show up inside, then cycled out of the
village, vomited a trickle of yellow water, slept some more on the road
side. This is when I decided to aim for the nearest affordable rental
room, which was in Pulat. There was another hill though. I was getting
seriously dehydrated and cycled as slow as I could. My body heated more
and sweated less than usual. There was one more cycle of vomiting and
napping, and the long downhill to Pulat. On this day I cycled only 17
km, but it was by far the most difficult 17 km of the tour. I was
incredibly grateful for being able to check in at 1 pm. I showered and
went to bed, woke once in the afternoon to drink, and slept again until
10 pm, when for the first time in 24 h I felt like eating a few spoons
of muesli.

The next day I woke up with a dried-up face and a slight remaining
headache, but I knew that the food poisoning had passed. I decided two
things: it was time for me to leave Krk, and then to take another break.
So I headed to the port of Valbinska, and took the car-ferry to the
Island of Rab. Since this was my first motorised transit on the tour, I
felt a bit of regret breaking the continuous, 2000 km long land line I
had cycled along all the way from Lille. But I was not ready to give up
on the Dalmatian Islands yet.

## The route (4 days, 203 km)

-   [28/07/20 Pivka - Njivice](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/53489909)
    97.1 km
-   [29/07/20 Njivice - Risika](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/53489911)
    48.6 km
-   [30/07/20 Risika - Punat](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/53489919)
    17.7 km
-   31/07/20 [Punat - Valbiska](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/53490190)
    & [Lopar - Rab](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/53490067) 39.3 km

## Photos
