---
title: Cycling in coastal Labëria or the Albanian Riviera
date: 2020-09-22 08:00:53.000000000 +02:00
categories:
- Cycling Europe
tags:
- Albania
header:
  image: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50360240442_edbcee86c1_b.jpg
  teaser: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50360240442_edbcee86c1_w.jpg
---

Official sources informed that border crossings overland between Albania
and Greece were closed to non-essential travellers until September 15,
2020, pandemic year 2020. It was September 15 though, and nobody seemed
to have any idea of what would happen tomorrow.

## Three months on the road

On the morning of September 16, I had been travelling for exactly three
months. A quarter of a year. An entire summer of bicycle touring.
[Northern
France](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-northern-france-and-belgium/),
[Switzerland](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-across-the-swiss-alps/), the
[Alps](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-through-south-tyrol-and-the-italian-dolomites/),
all of them seemed so far away now. In three months, I had received no
salary besides the little distance job I did while in
[Zürich](https://cyclingho.me/taking-a-break-in-zurich/), nor had I made
any effort towards a new full-time job. In three months though, I had
achieved much more than at anytime during my professional life. I had
cycled more than 3000 km in 13 countries, and had taken better care of
me than any time in recent years.

On the morning of September 16, none of the official sources from the
Greek government, the European Union or the French embassy in Greece had
been updated. But an Albanian newspaper cared enough to publish a short
article in English announcing that the travel ban was extended to
September 30. Bad news, but not unexpected. Talking with Albanians I
actually later realized that this is what had happened to them every two
weeks since May. Any other news would have been surprising. Meanwhile, I
rented a gorgeous studio in the hills above Vlorë. The place was tiny
but both incredibly unconventionally and very practically designed.
There were amazing views over the city and the sun setting seawards.

When I settle in a new place, I typically unmount the bike, have a
shower, and hurry go explore the surroundings in search for a quiet
coffee shop where I can sit and write and do photo work. But the place I
rented was so cosy that I just really wanted to stay there. Besides,
there was a small kitchen. So for the first time since staying at my
friend\'s place in
[Zürich](https://cyclingho.me/taking-a-break-in-zurich/), camping meals
and a quick pasta plate in
[Kotor](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-into-montenegro-and-the-bay-of-kotor/)
excluded, I went shopping and I cooked. Just for myself. Italian style
of course. Zucchini, pepper and tomato sauce. Pasta and *Kaçkavall*, an
Albanian hard-paste sheep cheese similar to the Italian *caciocavallo*.
Without olive oil and *herbes de Provence*, it wasn\'t quite the real
thing, but the vegetables were so tasty I could have eaten them raw.

I pondered on my opportunities. I could remain in Albania, settle
somewhere on the seaside, read books and relax, wait to see whether the
borders eventually opened. Nothing indicated this would happen anytime
soon though. I could head westwards to North Macedonia and Bulgaria.
Some 700 km of mountain roads and three coronavirus tests later, I would
in principle be able to enter Greece by road from Bulgaria. Or I could
even skip Greece entirely and cycle directly to Istanbul. On the other
hand, I could also take a ferry across the Adriatic Sea to the Italian
port of Brindisi, eat a pizza, and take another ferry from there to
Igoumenitsa in Greece. It was ridiculous and expensive but it would
work. Or I could take a ferry to Brindisi, eat a pizza, and continue my
travels in Italy, maybe go visit Sicily and mount Etna. Or, perhaps most
tempting of all options, I could take a ferry to Brindisi and just eat
pizzas. But I had made a promise to visit the Cyclades, and I was keen
on keeping it. No, I *needed* to go to the Cyclades.

Then, there came surprising news from
[Jean-Miguel](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-into-montenegro-and-the-bay-of-kotor/)
that it was apparently possible to cross the Albanian-Greek border with
a European Union pass. A motorcyclist who stayed at the same hostel with
him had somehow managed it. So I told the owner of the flat that I
rented that I was leaving the next day. In the worst case, I would enjoy
a little tour of the Albanian Riviera, and come back to Vlorë through
Girokastër, delaying my ferry transit to Italy by a few days. Then I
went down to the beach and relaxed.

While cycling through the [Albanian
plains](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-along-the-coastal-plains-of-illyria/),
I had had this feeling of homesickness and loneliness. Twitter must have
known about that, since I began spending there much more time than in
the previous weeks, dropping a little comment here and there, looking
for some kind of social interaction in the digital realm. What I saw
there though, did not really appease my moods. Enormous fires were
burning all along the western United States, the smoke of which produced
visions of doom in the American coastal cities. In western Europe, thé
temperatures were shooting above September records. The last remaining
ice shelve of the northern hemisphere had just disintegrated, and
beautiful satellite images came from all over the Arctic, of glaciers
and ice caps showing more bare ice, and less snow, than ever.

It was not only the planet that was not doing well. Academia was not
doing well either. Ex-colleagues seemed to be suffering from an epidemic
overdose of online meetings. Some were loosing their jobs, and
inevitably, others were overwhelmed with requests for paper reviews. The
journal *Nature* was blaming it all on the pandemic, others on the
politics. My personal, unpopular feeling though, was that academia had
become unsustainable from within, and that the recent events had just
finished tipping it off balance. Old friends and colleagues suffered,
but I was now a disempowered online witness, no longer part of the
story, partly because I no longer had the energy to be part of it. So as
I lay there on the beach in Vlorë, the sound of the waves behind my
ears, empty bars in the direction of my feet, I decided that I had to
drop it. So I said goodbye and closed my account.

## A pass of seas and clouds

I felt really bad about it. Twitter was my last remaining link to the
academic world, and to some extent, to the rest of the world. I felt I
was a climate denier, protecting myself from disturbing scenes in order
to preserve my comfort. I felt I should be working for free, getting a
couple of papers out and writing proposal after proposal, like normal
researchers do. And I felt stupid for feeling so. Perhaps above all
else, I felt I was failing my mentors, talented and humane people who
had given up their weekends, nights, and family holidays when I needed
them to help get my degree or my next job. But it was just as evident
that I could no longer carry the Twitter item in my bags. I needed to
lighten up, to take some weight off the bike. Maybe science break is
like heartbreak after all. At some point you need to drop it, at least
for a while. Dear Academic Twitter, I\'m always up for a good talk after
we both get over this.

Friends wrote back. People I had not met in years. The first person who
wrote was someone I had had a good chat with on a bus ride in Alaska,
eight years prior, a PhD student like me then, who had since become a
very influential and inspiring person. She was one of these people who
seem to carry a bike-load of smiles and positivity whenever they go. Her
message was very short, in the lines of \"I\'ve left academia, no
regrets\", but this was enough for me. Enough to know that contacts
outside the academic world were watching over me, and that there would
be very exiting job opportunities out there when I would be ready for
them.

After some 20 km, the road became so steep, that I finally had to stop
thinking. I had left Vlorë a little late in the morning, and it was
getting really hot again. Besides, I felt that cars drove here faster
than anywhere else in Albania. I was cycling up the Lljogara Pass, a
1000 m high road between the Mediterranean Sea and the Mediterranean Sea
or, to be more precise, between the Adriatic and Ionian Seas, the
transition between which being loosely defined as the large strait that
separates southern Albania from Italy. The pass road was mostly climbing
straight up-valley, with an uneven gradient and sections well to steep
for comfort. I could feel the pressure drop in my ears, and blood
pumping into my head, precursory signs of headache, though perhaps
symptoms of changing weather rather than altitude in this case.

I stopped for lunch in Llogara, some 250 m before the pass, in a largely
empty restaurant where unattractive signs advertised \"ravioli, pizza\"
and \"open\". Tables had been dressed up in a garden under the pines,
and a large fountain provided water to colonies of honey bees, and
soothing music to the restaurant guests, which was only me for now. I
ate there the best ravioli in my life. The dough was elastic, the
cooking perfect. The pasta were filled with spinach and home-made
ricotta cheese. Six ravioli were disposed in a circle on a plate, with a
slightly cooked half cherry tomato between each, the juice of which
mixed with a light herbal lemon sauce. The centre of the plate was
decorated with basil leaves, under which lay hidden a full cherry tomato
and a dried or maybe even lightly smoked, tip from a herb I used to grow
on the balcony and loved but what was it\... Ah yes, sage! The other
side of the mountain was actually covered in sage. The owners were so
kind they offered me a baked cornflower paste mixed with honey as
dessert.

This was ample energy to ride the last few, steep switchbacks up to the
pass. On top of the road, pine forests disappeared and let space to an
arid mountain slope plunging a kilometre down, straight into the clouds.
The Ionian Sea was like the Adriatic Sea except that it appeared not
filled with water, but with clouds. There were clouds above my head,
clouds on the horizon, clouds below my feet. In the distance, the
silhouette of a mountainous island popped through the clouds. An oblique
world of clouds without top of bottom. I lost all sense of altitude. The
air was moist and cool, almost autumnal.

On the way down from the pass, which was as steep as the way up, I
cycled past a huge flock of goats. The goats had bells that must have
had carefully carved curves, for their sound was nothing like the animal
bells used in the Alps. The sounds of the bells melted into one another,
and it sounded as if the entire flock was orchestrating some sort of
symphony of the clouds. At lower elevations, the air became steamy hot.
As if the ravioli were not enough, I made a stop in Gjelik where I now
ate the best börek in my life. About when I took my first bite in the
crispy dough and the fresh mountain cheese, rain started pouring heavily
outside the store. After all these weeks of sun and blue sky, the rain
felt like some kind of supernatural phenomenon. The temperature dropped
by several degrees. When I took the road again, I was getting tired and
my head started to ache.

The coastal road was constant ups and down. Small canyons cut through
the steep mountain side and ran down to the Ionian Sea below. As I was
reaching the top of yet another hill, two guardian dogs decided that my
bike and I were a serious threat to the house. While I was changing
gears to begin the downhill, the dogs jumped off the two-metre high wall
that separated the house from the road and started racing behind my
bike. I am not sure what happened next, but I was already cycling at 20
or 25 km/h when one of the dogs actually managed to catch up and to slow
down the 100 kg of me and my bike. For a while, I even wondered if he
had bitten the rear tire. Maybe he caught one of the straps on my
panniers and let go. I hoped the dog did not hurt itself, but did not
take the risk to cycle back and have a look.

Later there came more rain, this time light and cool, like a
Scandinavian summer rain. Eventually I had to fetch my rain jacket from
deep in the bags. It was the first time I used it since walking the
streets of
[Split](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-and-city-tourism-in-central-dalmatia/)
and, I think, the first time I wore it on the bike since cycling out of
the Alps and into
[Bled](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-through-the-julian-alps-and-slovenia/).
I stopped at a small camping in Hiranë, where Ina, a local mountain
guide and improvised English translator between the staff and me,
explained that all the guests but her had left the place following a
storm warning. The Medicane, the Mediterranean Sea\'s occasional
pseudo-tropical storm, had built up north of Tunisia and was due to hit
the Greek coast overnight. Little more rain fell overnight, but some
wind gusts woke me up in the later part of the night, after which I had
trouble to fall back asleep.

## Getting ready for Greece

Only 50 km separated Himarë from Sarandë, but the coast road never took
a rest. It was hill after hill. Actually, I found it amazing that there
was a road at all. The region felt more remote than the rest of the
Albanian coast. On this side of the Llogara Pass, the culture seemed a
bit different too. Mosques had become a rarity and were replaced by tiny
blue-roofed churches attended by bearded priests in long black robes. I
was getting closer to orthodox Greece. In Sarandë, I booked again a
little studio for three nights, time to do some research on Greece, get
a coronavirus test and fill up an entry form.

On my first morning in Sarandë though, I preferred to begin the day with
a slow fruity breakfast on the balcony, a beach walk and some photo work
at a café under banana trees. In the afternoon, I visited a small
private medical laboratory. A queerly designed little place with
diplomas and conference participation certificates framed on the walls,
and a central desk protected by both a transparent glass and a
collection of potted plants, which actually made it very hard to even
see anything. The doctor could not speak much English but let me
understand that the lab was closed for the day, but that I could come
back the next morning for a test, of which I would receive the results
the day after at twelve. He then reached out for a piece of paper and
wrote \"14:00\". When I asked how much the test costed, he painted an
imaginary one and two zeros on the front window and added \"euros\".
\"Yes, American company, very expensive\".

I walked back to my apartment not knowing what to do. Was I really going
to pay a hundred euros for a mere piece of paper, which I was not sure
would get me across the border at all? Or should I just cycle to Kakavië
and get more up-to-date information there? I took out my laptop and
began to fill the Greek authorities\' on-line entry form. Travelling by
bike was apparently not a respectable option, so I had to pick the car
category, and enter \"bicycle\" as my car plate number. Throughout the
process there were constant reminders in red letters than yes, I really,
really needed a test. At some point I clicked next and that was it. I
had submitted the form. My first address in Greece was a random lake in
the mountains not too far from the border.

On my second morning in Sarandë, I eventually went to get the test. As I
entered the tiny lab, a man was exiting the place unmasked, nose
bleeding, holding a tiny balled-up tissue drenched in blood in his hand.
He put the red tissue in his pocket and used the same hand to pick up a
large pile of 1000 lek notes from his wallet and loosely drop them on
the doctor\'s desk. I wondered what were my chances to actually catch
the virus right here. Then it was my turn. The doctor sampled my throat
and both nostrils, which was uncomfortable but not painful, then reached
for a piece of paper and told me to come back the next day at \"18:00 to
19:00\". Luckily there was an option to edit the online entry form and
inform that I would enter Greece a day later. As this would leave more
time for cycling, I also corrected the address for the nearest proper
camp site in Ionnina, 100 km from Sarandë. Then I extended my
accommodation to spend one more night in Albania.

On my third morning in Sarandë, I planned to cycle to the nearby
archaeological site in Butrint, but I woke up feeling like doing nothing
much but sip coffee and write. So I sipped coffee and wrote, trying not
to think too much about what the test result would be, and whether or
not I would be able to enter Greece. Yet after lunch, I could not resist
passing by the medical laboratory again, just in case my little envelope
was ready for pickup. The doctor must have recognized my face now. He
was busy giving a phone call and I was going to leave and come again in
the evening when I heard my name. \"A few minutes\", he then said. As I
sat there in the tiny waiting corner of the already tiny lab, I suddenly
wondered what I would do in case the test came out positive, an
eventuality I had not really even considered until then. What was I
meant to do then? Would I be released to nature with instructions to
hide deep in the forest? Would a police car come by to lock me up in a
hotel room for two weeks? Then the doctor told me that I had done \"very
good, Julien\", and handed my negative certificate, a 100 euros worth
piece of paper with my name and a QR code, and a little envelope just
for the form. I worried that the paper did not bear my ID card number,
but the doctor guaranteed it was hidden in the QR code. I was good for
another day of wishful thinking.

Almost ironically, as I stood on the balcony of my rental flat that
evening, a large ferry boat passed by in the distance. All ferry traffic
between Italy and Igoumenitsa actually runs by just in front of Sarandë,
between the Albanian coast and the Greek Island of Corfu, a strait only
two kilometres wide at the narrowest. The ferries across the straight on
the other hand, were parked here in the port of Sarandë, for several
months now, and no one in town expected them to leave it soon.

## The route (2 days, 136 km)

-   [17/09/20 Vlorë - Himarë](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/56499718)
    72.8 km
-   [18/09/20 Himarë - Sarandë](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/56499721)
    53.2 km

## Photos
