---
title: Cycling east in northern France and Belgium
date: 2020-06-27 08:06:13.000000000 +02:00
categories:
- Cycling Europe
tags:
- Belgium
- France
---

The border to Belgium finally opened on June 15. It had been closed for
nearly two months. The scenes of barbed wire on country cycle paths were
surreal. During the days of recovery, when we could finally go out of
the house and our neighborhoods but not yet cross the border, I came to
realize that, despite living my first twenty years in Lille, I often did
not know where the border to Belgium was. In fact for the most part, the
border between northern France and Belgium is an invisible line between
a sugar beet field and an onion field, or between two slightly different
shades of grey on the pavement.

## Leaving my childhood home

On June 15 the border was finally opened, and on the 16 I was cycling
east, actually rather southeast, loosely following it, taking pleasure
in moving back and forth between two countries that were culturally not
so different. I had finished packing in the morning, weighted my bags,
containing a total 25 kg of clothing, camping gear and other diverse
equipment. To this one should add 15 kg of steel put together in a
sturdy pedaling machine and another 65 kg of flesh which they say is
mostly water. That\'s 105 kg, plus 3 to 5 kg of food and water. Somehow
this seemed little. I had carried more, even much more, on shorter
trips. For a while I wondered: did I miss something out? But no, it was
impossible. My gear had been ready for three months. Over the years I
had made a very detailed list, completed or reworked over multiple
previous trips. I actually never felt so well prepared.

I cycled out of the Lille metropolis following *canal de Roubaix*, which
on the other side of the border becomes *canal de l\'Espierre*, then
turned south to cycle up the Scheldt River (*Escaut*) to Tournai.
Naturally I took a slow pace, one I knew I could keep for days. The wind
was from the southwest, so I sometimes had it quarter in my back,
sometimes quarter upfront. My decision to leave had been hasty, my
direction dictated by the current geopolitico-pandemic status. At this
time of the year I felt like cycling north to a cooler summer, but
Sweden had not applied a lockdown and in turn Nordic countries were slow
to open up again to foreign tourists. For a while I thought that all I
had lived, especially all I had lived recently, had been setting me up
for this journey. I just felt like I could travel longer and farther
than ever before.

I biked across the Belgian Hainaut and the plain of the River Scarpe,
through the notorious Trouée d\'Arenberg where I attempted a few metres
on the famous cobblestones only to write about it in this blog. By
evening I reached Le Quesnoy where I set up my first camp. Hundreds
kilometres for a first day after three months of isolation and little
sports felt much too long.

## South of the North

On day two I continued my journey across the southeastern part of the
Nord department. The landscape became more hilly and the open fields
where replaced by a bocage that was more alike my image of England than
the typical French countryside. The roads were quiet and hedges offered
a good protection from the winds. I really enjoyed cycling across the
hills of Avesnois, marveled at the fact I had ignored a landscape so
different yet so near from my childhood home.

The rain started for real when I crossed the French-Belgian border for
the third time. Surprisingly it just gave me a boost. I took out the
plastic case I recently revamped to set up my phone on the front
pannier, and put my brand new rain pants on: Scotland taught me how
miserable it gets without them. And I just felt invincible. This is what
three months of lockdown do. The pavement was smooth and the road
cutting straight through the woods along an old railway. Ravel, the
cycling network of Belgium, is truly amazing at times. I originally
planned on camping in Chimay, but the rain was pouring and I just did
not feel like stopping here, so I cycled on. The Ravel stopped abruptly
in Aublain, and I continued on roads to Olloy-sur-Viroin where I caught
up with another beautiful cycle road, climbing up through the woods to
what would be my first little pass at 370 metres.

The road then dived steep into the Meuse River valley, a deep meandering
gorge cutting south to north through the entire massif of Ardennes. With
the rain still pouring I decided to push on to my uncle\'s house in
Nouzonville, arriving a day earlier than what I had planned. I probably
would have enjoyed the ride more at slow pace the next day, but the
prospect of eating dry and sleeping under a roof took over. In total I
cycled 154 km that day. Surprisingly my legs were fine, but my body used
to the lockdown life was drained. I could definitely not keep up such a
rhythm for days in a row.

## Family break in the Ardennes

I spent the next couple of days in the French Ardennes. These were
incredibly resourceful. Exhausted by the long day of cycling in the
rain, I slept better than I had for months. I stayed at my uncle\'s
place. We went for walks in the forest, visited my grandparents and
cousin, watched a wasp putting a fly to pieces in our place, and picked
cherries in the tree yard.

As a kid I hadn\'t paid much attention, but as an adult I admired their
ways to live. They grew their own vegetables, collected rain water and
composted waste for the garden. After months of isolation, my
grandparents were visibly pleased to receive visits. They prepared good
meals for us and too easily forgot that I had slept in a busy camping
two nights ago and potentially carried the virus on me.

The days were so comfortable that I even thought of just stopping here
and starting a new life in the Ardennes. I would buy a small house near
the forest, with a garage for my bike, grow fruit trees and start my own
business or something. But no, I was just at the beginning of the
journey. I had decided that I needed at least ten days of cycling before
deciding if the bike touring life wasn\'t fun.

## The route (2 days, 254 km)

-   [16/06/20 Marcq-en-Barœul - Le
    Quesnoy](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/51976363) 100.3 km
-   [17/06/20 Le Quesnoy -
    Nouzonville](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/51976365) 154.1 km

## Photos
