---
title: Cycling north to south on Dugi Otok
date: 2020-08-23 20:00:00.000000000 +02:00
categories:
- Cycling Europe
tags:
- Croatia
---

Throughout my stay in Croatia, I had not yet seen the open sea. I spent
my days by the Adriatic shore, but the western horizon was always dotted
with distant islands. So after my three-nights stay in Zadar, I took the
early morning ferry from the port of Gaženica to the village or Brbinj
on Dugi Otok.

## Blue waters and plastic beaches

If you\'re standing on the pier in Zadar, you have a panoramic view on
Ugljan Island (where I planned to cycle next). Behind Ugljan, there is
the island if Iž. Behind Iž is Rava, and behind Rava is Dugi Otok. And
behind Dugi Otok, there is nothing but the Adriatic Sea. Dugi Otok,
literally Long Island, forms a 40-km long, thin stripe of land located
20 km offshore Zadar. Except for its two extremities where the land
forks into peninsulas, the island is never wider than a few kilometres,
and it has only one road. From Brbinj, I planned to cycle all the way to
the island\'s north-western tip, and then back across the entire length
to the Telašćica Nature Preserve, which faces the Kornati Islands
National Park to the south.

Dugi Otok was greener than Pag. Actually it would be more correct to say
that Pag was yellow, whereas Dugi Otok was green. There were pine, olive
and fig trees naturally growing on the roadside. The figs were getting
ripe, and sometimes it was almost possible to just grab them while
cycling. The road was not flat, but the ridge-line sections were well
worth the climbs. There was little traffic as compared to
[Krk](http://cyclingho.me/cycling-about-croatias-krk-island/) and
[Pag](http://cyclingho.me/cycling-on-pag-island-and-to-zadar/) Islands,
so the drive was actually really enjoyable. Landwards, the view extended
on a sea filled with islands of all sizes, and to the Velebit Mountains
in the distance. Westwards, it was the open sea, a half-panorama of flat
blue horizon.

I cycled down to the Veli Rat lighthouse, were I spent a couple of hours
chilling down. The water was incredibly clear, letting the seafloor be
seen even five to ten metres below the surface. Fish gathered in schools
of hundreds or perhaps thousands, floating undisturbed under the oblique
rays of filtered sunlight. I think I never saw that much fish in my life
before. I took a walk around. There were inlets with a shade of blue
that I thought existed only in magazines, and a geographic curiosity, a
land bridge, like a two-sided pebble beach, connecting to the last
island-like tip of the peninsula.

Unfortunately, like many other places I had visited in Croatia, the
coastline around Veli Rat was also littered in plastic. If one stayed
around the camping and the bar, one would perhaps not notice. But spread
about the trees behind, there were literally truckloads of plastic.
There were plastic items of all kinds and sizes, ranging from bits of
plastic bags to large plastic boxes used on fishing boats. Some trees
had already begun to grow on top of the plastic. If geologists from the
future wanted to date 2020, they could just search the ground for a
layer of plastic, I thought. Plastic bottle? 2020. Plastic buoy? 2020.
Plastic-eating fish? 2020. The great human age of plastic.

After a long break, I cycled back towards Brbinj and then further south
on the island\'s main road. I was getting used to cycling in the heat.
With long clothes and a slow pace, the uphills did not feel as bad as
during my first days in Croatia. On the southern part of the island, the
landscape became progressively dryer. I cycled down to the small coastal
village of Luka to buy food. There were kids playing in the harbour and
old men sitting by the tiny grocery store, apparently just watching bike
tourists passing by. Luka was the first village I visited in Croatia
that did not feel like a touristic hub.

There was a small camping, but I did not need a shower and somehow just
wanted my own little beach for tonight. So I cycled a bit further south
and then down a steep road to a beach I had seen on the satellite
images. The actual beach ended up to be about one by two meters wide,
which was just the size of my tent. The rest was a muddy gravel shore
that appeared to flood at high tide, as indicated by the thin line of
plastic detritus following the olive garden walls. The sea was shallow
and full of urchins, so that I did not risk a night-time swim. Not the
best wild camp ever. But exiting news came in. My friends Amandine and
Loran were on their way to Croatia (the fast way, not by bike) and ready
to meet me two days later.

## On the cliffs before the crowds

The next morning, I woke around sunrise as usual, but noticed that the
light was different. A weather phenomenon that I had not seen in a
while. Clouds. The clouds brought a very welcomed couple hours of
freshness. I cycled directly into the Telašćica preserve and up to the
top of the Dugi Otok Cliffs, where they drop 150 m vertically into the
Adriatic Sea. The road was steep and narrow, but I met only two cars.
There was a slight breeze at the top, and the Kornati Islands where
visible to the south. I then moved on the the end of the road, which was
closed to cars, but had a few pedestrians walking the last kilometres to
a small bay with a few restaurants.

The Telašćica Bay was very quiet, and restaurants closed although it was
almost ten. I had very little water left but took a walk along the
cliffs, and to Lake Mir, whose waters are even saltier than the sea due
to underground connections and evaporation. For most of the walk, I was
completely alone, but when I returned to the bay, I was suddenly faced
with a continuous flow of tourists carrying large shopping bags and
beachside items. I could not believe that so many people had decided to
give up their cars and walk the last few kilometres of the road.
Amazing. But no. A large ship had anchored in the bay, and actually an
even bigger one was preparing to do the same, with a few hundred
passengers on board. The restaurants had of course open. I had a
tasteless and largely overpriced cappuccino (25 kuna) and a glass of
water. I had been planning to spend most of the day here, but this
finished to convince me to cycle out of the preserve to somewhere
quieter.

I ended up in the little port of Sali. It was August fifteen and the
town was, in fact, very quiet. The supermarket was closed and most
restaurants opened only in the evening. As usual, I spent the hottest
hours of the day on a beach. Amandine had
[suggested](http://cyclingho.me/taking-a-break-in-rab/) that I hike
somewhere high to watch the sun set over the Kornati Islands. So in the
evening, instead of taking the ferry back to Zadar, I decided to cycle
to the other, drier side of Telašćica Bay.

## Milky figs and milky way

There were so many figs by the roadside that I almost missed the sunset.
They were so good, that I decided it had been worth cycling two thousand
kilometres if only for picking figs on the roadside. The landscape
became again very dry. Only a few lone pine trees dotted the arid hills,
catching colours in the evening sun. Towards the end, the gravel road
was much rougher than what I would like to cycle on with a laptop in my
bags. I managed to climb a little hill just in time before the sun
disappeared behind distant clouds. The southern sea was filled with
dozens of golden hills poking out of the water. I had planned to cycle
out of the preserve for camping. I thought the road made a loop but it
was a dead end, and it was quickly getting dark.

I don\'t like much breaking the rules, and even less to brag about it on
the internet. But after all I\'d seen in the so-called preserve (car
traffic, large ships bringing crowds of tourists, trash on the sea
floor), I did not feel bad camping here. My tent is tiny, I always bury
human waste and never make camp fires (which would be a very bad idea in
Croatia). In any case, I ended up sleeping in an olive garden, which was
closer to a trash dump than a natural space. I picked this spot rather
than the car parks mostly because there was an stone wall which would
make a good support for photographs, facing the direction of the evening
milky way.

On the next morning I woke just in time for sunrise, and cycled back the
bumpy road to Sali, where I took the ferry to Zadar. Before cycling to
Bibinje to meet my friends, I could enjoy once more the sound of the
Zadar sea organ. The artist who designed this instrument is a genius, I
thought. The organ uses the natural rhythm of the waves to produce an
ambient melody, that creates a very special atmosphere over part of the
city centre. If anyone has come up with a smarter way to bind people
both together and with nature, I would like to know.

## The route (3 days, 138.1 km)

-   14/08/20 [Zadar - Zadar](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/54670043) &
    [Brbinj - Zaglav](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/54670042) 74.7 km
-   [15/08/20 Zaglav - Sali](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/54669996)
    40.7 km
-   16/08/20 [Sali - Sali](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/54670091) &
    [Zadar - Bibinje](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/54670092) &
    [Bibinje - Bibinje](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/54670093) 22.7 km

## Photos
