---
title: Cycling into Montenegro and the Bay of Kotor
date: 2020-09-10 16:00:59.000000000 +02:00
categories:
- Cycling Europe
tags:
- Croatia
- Montenegro
---

On August 31, 2020, after spending the entire month in Croatia, I was
preparing to finally cycle out of the country, out of the European Union
and into Montenegro. Montenegro was a country I had been looking forward
to ever since I left [Northern
France](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-northern-france-and-belgium/), if
only for the fact that this blog\'s domain name is registered in
Montenegro.

## A good day to enter Montenegro

I left
[Dubrovnik](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-along-the-southern-dalmatian-seashore/)
by the main road, and soon had my last sea bath in Croatia. The road
remained busy until the airport, located some distance south of the city
due to topography, as Croatia became a thin, steep stripe of land
squeezed between the Adriatic Sea and the Bosnian border. After the
airport, I could cycle on a small rural road where I fed myself with
blackberries so sweet from all the summer sun they tasted like
blackberry jam. There was a last supermarket, which looked more like an
airport duty-free store than a supermarket, and the road went up through
cypress woods to the Montenegrin border.

Before even passing the customs, I was welcomed to Montenegro by a giant
red billboard translated into four languages, first of which was French,
announcing that wild camping was expressly prohibited. *Bienvenue au
Monténégro!* The border crossing was smooth. I had an identification
check and cycled down into the coastal town of Igalo, where I was soon
welcomed by cheering crowds singing slogans, blowing car horns and
waving blue-white-red flags which I only later identified as Serbian and
ex-Yougoslavian.

I was quickly approached and explained with a great deal of bear sputter
that there had been parliamentary elections, that Montenegro was Serbia,
you know, and that Serbia was winning the vote, so it was a great day
for Montenegro. Feeling confused, I had a break in Herzeg Novi, a
seaside resort busy with young tourists from all over the Balkans. The
final results of the vote must have fallen roughly when I attempted to
exit the town and cycle to a nearby campsite, for the roads where
suddenly packed with constant honking cars and cheering. But as a good
part of the population was celebrating, it was equally obvious that
another part did not approve the results of the polls, and instead
looked at the ongoing party scenes with grim.

It so happened that I had entered Montenegro on the day of the
country\'s first ever political shift in its short history. But since I
had left the European Union, I no longer had internet access on my
phone, and therefore had little idea of what was happening. What I
understood though, is that the party would go on for much of the night.
And since I came from a country were this situation would most likely
end up in burned cars and teargas, I decided to turn back into the town
and look for a hotel. I stopped at a small pizzeria where I tried to get
more information from the owner, who explained to me that the *other*
party had won, and suggested Hotel Plaža, a large but oldish and largely
empty grand hotel where I obtained a room for less than 20 euros. The
receptionist was too professional to get into political talk, but she
too seemed incredibly depressed by the result of the polls.

## Bay of Kotor and moustache ales

The next day, first of September 2020, it occurred to me that I had left
academia for exactly six months, and I woke up full of good intentions
for the coming, well, six months, or maybe rest of my life while I was
at it. I would become vegetarian, stop drinking alcohol, and travel on a
smaller budget. I was very serious about this. As for today, I planned
to cycle 60 km to the coastal town of Budva, where I would reach my 3000
km milestone, and sleep in the little campsite right in the town centre.
Funny how when you believe you have finally taken control of your life,
the world seems to suddenly unite to remind you how dependent you truly
are. For none of the above actually happened.

The first thing that happened on September 1st is that I took the
elevator down from floor 7 to floor 2 of gigantic Hotel Plaža to enjoy
my 3-euro breakfast \-- something very simple I expected \-- and be
served a giant plate of steamy smoked sausage and bacon, actually the
largest plate of meat I ate since getting ill on Krk Island. Vegetarian
intentions? Gone.

A few kilometres after leaving town, there were two touring bicycles
parked by a beachside café, the first I had seen in a long while. As I
was beginning my third round of stares on the customers, searching for
anything with the looks of another mad cyclist, Jean-Miguel came to meet
me with a great smile. He and Eva, two Frenchies like me, had travelled
all the way from Grenoble around the Alps, across the Po Plain and along
the coastlines of Istria and Dalmatia. It was their first long-distance
bike tour, and they had now been on the road for fifty days. They were,
I believe, the first bicycle tourists I met who travelled both so slow
and so long as I did.

So we had a coffee, and another coffee. We talked a bit about our
respective adventures, exchanged what we had heard or read about the
parliamentary elections to try and make sense of the previous day\'s
events, and it was suddenly 1 p.m. Budva? Well, that begun to feel a
little far for the day. Besides, Jean-Miguel and Eva slept in hammocks,
and they had seen better nights than their last one. The noise-making,
flag-waving and driving-in-circles had stopped around 2 a.m., because
then, rain had started. And rain and hammocks don\'t go well along. So
we decided to all meet again in Kotor and book rooms there, for the town
had no campsite but was said to be a beautiful place. 3000 km? Cheap
camping? Not today.

I cycled around the deep, mountainous Bay of Kotor, where steep
limestone hills plunge abruptly into the sea and create a topography
reminiscent of Norwegian fjords. There were plenty of figs,
blackberries, and green pomegranates. Pomegranate trees had begun to
appear in southern Dalmatia, giving me something else to look forward to
for when the fig season would end. I passed the little town of Perast,
its renovated stone houses facing two island monasteries, and finally
cycled into, or rather pushed my bike into, the fortified old town of
Kotor.

I directly bumped into Eva and Jean-Miguel again, for without prior
agreement we had picked the same hostel. Then we went for beers. No
alcohol? I may as well keep that idea for when I will be in Turkey.
Besides, Montenegro must have made a very careful market study of what
kind of cycle tourists were coming in this year, for they had really
good pale ales (my favourite kind of beer) with pictures of
moustache-bearing mad scientists on the labels. I\'m glad I left
academia before catching a moustache, but for fairness I would like to
point out to Academija Brewery that there exist a fair deal of mad
female scientists as well, though I must admit I have not met any of
them cycling to Montenegro so far.

## Four hands and a keyboard

In Kotor unlike Croatia, the lack of tourists was very obvious. Cafés
and restaurants had few customers. The harbour was built for large
cruise ships to anchor directly outside the city wall, but this year, it
was empty. Everybody I met in Kotor though, appeared very relaxed about
this situation. Some tourists came by land from the rest of the Balkans,
and by air (and bike) apparently mainly from France, for I could hear
French spoken at every street corner. This was 2020, it was a different
year, and that was it.

I quickly fell in love with Kotor. Similar to Dalmatian cities of
Croatia, the old town was entirely pedestrian. Once part of the Venetian
Republic, the city had been fortified against Ottoman invasions, its
walls climbing an incredible 200 meters above the sea on the steep rock
walls behind the town. For 20 euros a night, I slept in a gorgeous room
right in the old town, including a little study by the window where I
could work on my blog and listen to the sounds of jazz songs played in
repeat at the restaurant below.

Jean-Miguel and Eva apparently liked it too, and we all ended up staying
a full five nights in Kotor. And a very relaxing four days. Every
morning, I had a simple breakfast at Konoba Roma, which was just muesli,
fruits and *Deutsch.* Just to clarify, this did not mean that I had bits
of Germans in my muesli, but that I had a *Milchkaffee* on the side.
While the sun was rising behind the mountain walls, the city remained in
the shade, and I could work a few hours on my photos, after which the
nearby restaurant put on their one album of jazz songs and I moved back
to my room for writing. I updated my blog with a summary post on
[bicycle touring in
Croatia](https://cyclingho.me/bicycke-touring-tips-for-coastal-croatia/),
and finalized posts on [cycling during the
pandemic](https://cyclingho.me/bicycle-touring-during-the-pandemic/) and
a [bicycle touring gear
list](https://cyclingho.me/bicycle-touring-gear-list/). In the evenings,
I typically met Jean-Miguel and Eva for drinks or dinner and we had long
conversations in French.

One evening, a solo musician was playing jazz standards and remakes on
an electric piano outside a bar in town. This was the first time I heard
live jazz music since the beginning of 2020, and I loved the musician\'s
style, rich in low pitches. Then magic happened. During a break, a
customer stepped in and began to play jazz tunes on the piano. The bar
offered him a drink and this must have been interpreted as some kind of
green light, for he came back on stage to play one jazz standard after
another, with incredible ease and personal interpretation. When the
first musician sat back on the piano, she first sounded very stressed,
which was totally understandable after listening to such a virtuoso, but
then it felt like she too stepped out of her comfort zone, and out of
the zone of socially acceptable music at a somewhat classy wine bar for
tourists. The two of them played late into the night, including a few
four-hands. I was incredibly grateful for the evening. This was the
strongest musical experience I had had in a while.

After five days in Kotor, I was beginning to feel an itch to step on the
bike again. At the same time, I was feeling refilled. Socially refilled
by the long discussions with my fellow bicycle tourers Jean-Miguel and
Eva, by their curiosity and their open hearts. Emotionally refilled by
the magical music evening. So I also knew that leaving Kotor would not
be so easy.

## The route (2 days, 106.9 km)

-   [31/08/20 Dubrovnik - Herzeg
    Novi](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/55869355) 61.6 km
-   [01/09/20 Herzeg Novi -
    Kotor](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/55869359) 45.3 km

## Photos
