---
title: Cycling and visiting cities in Central Dalmatia
date: 2020-08-28 08:00:00.000000000 +02:00
categories:
- Cycling Europe
tags:
- Croatia
---

I had not initially expected to encounter any more familiar faces after
[Zurich](http://cyclingho.me/taking-a-break-in-zurich/). But part of my
recent motivation for cycling so slowly across Croatia was the prospect
to meet friends in the Zadar region in mid-August. When Amandine and
Loran confirmed that they were on their way, I was thrilled to meet
them, thrilled to meet people for whom I would be more than just another
tourist in the masses.

## Meeting friends in Bibinje

Loran and Amandine had recently moved from Zurich, where we had met, to
Marseille. I imagined their move as an amplified, longer-termed version
of my experience cycling across the
[border](http://cyclingho.me/cycling-about-croatias-krk-island/) from
Slovenia to Croatia. Amandine is one of the very few persons I know who
has managed to sail through the stormy seas of academia without giving
up her weekends, relationships and social life, something I am totally
incapable of. Her partner Loran is a musician with family roots in the
Zadar region, who had just seen the busiest months of the year replaced
by a long, compulsory holiday.

Before I even arrived, Amandine and Loran found a little camping for me
in Bibinje, which was exactly what I needed. It had trees, grass, and
direct access to the sea. Instead of an expensive army of cleaners like
I had seen in previous, overpriced Croatian campsites, there were signs
that explained how to use a toilet brush in three steps (step one, not
in your hair), and that seemed to work very well.

On the evening we met, Amandine asked what I enjoyed and missed the most
on the road. I had to think about it for a bit, but the answers came
pretty straightforward. What I enjoyed the most was simply to be
outdoors, to feel the sun and the wind twenty four hours a day instead
of spending my life in front of a computer screen. What I missed the
most was human contact, which I had not expected in forehand, since I am
generally thought of myself as rather asocial. The next day\'s program
was decided: beach, beach, and restaurant. Not before 15:00.

We talked a bit of our respective lives after leaving Zurich, of the
lockdown. I asked Amandine how she dealt with the academic storm without
being caught by the winds of individual competition. She explained that
she had basically just stopped putting work as the uttermost priority in
her life\'s decision. This sounded simple, and a very natural choice in
our latin cultures, where the words to talk about work derive from an
instrument of torture *(tripalium)* and a form of intense suffering
*(labor)*. But at the same time it wasn\'t simple to me. When caught up
in an exciting research project, I was the kind of person to swim
counter currents untill drained of all my energy, my humanity, my
relationships. I was like the majority of scientists, which is why
universities can afford to pay us part-time and still expect us to work
at weekend. In some ways, I had eventually made a similar choice to
Amandine, had manage to take down my working time closer to a
fourty-hour week, and to the 80 percent part-time contract I was being
paid for. And now here I was, out of the game.

On the third day, we took the car-ferry to Ugjlan and hiked to a secret
inlet whose location I am not allowed to reveal on this blog. The
weather was stormy, which made for more comfortable hiking. The inlet
waters were fresh and blue. At first, it looked like we would be spared
by the rain, but in mid-afternoon, foamy waves and thick sea spray
suddenly appeared in the distance. A sailboat was caught by surprise,
and we could hear its sail bang in the wind hundreds of metres away as
the ship tried to turn around. I said I would not like to be on that
boat. \"Ah, just standard procedure\", Amandine commented.

After the storm, we climbed to one of the highest hills on Ugljan. The
skies had been cleared up and the view extended in all directions. The
Kornati Islands were again visible to the south. Northwards, the steep
mountain ridge of Cres Island emerged from the sea like a Mount Fuji of
the Adriatic. Landwards, sideways lightning revealed all topographic
details of the Velebit Mountains.

## The National Park turned money machine

After three nights in Bibinje, I took again the ferry to Ugljan, but
this time with my fully loaded bike. Cycling on Ugljan and the next
island of Pašman was quite enjoyable. South of Zadar and at least down
to Split, there were blue signs that marked the EuroVelo 8, a
long-distance Mediterranean cycling route that runs from Cadiz in
southern Spain to Athens, and then on to Izmir and Cyprus. Wherever
possible, the signs led to minor roads that often ran along the sea
shore. The itinerary was not always ideal, and some signs were missing,
but this was quite a level above what I had seen so far in Croatia. I
also felt that cars were driving more carefully here, as if there had
been some kind of awareness campaign.

There were so many figs on the roadside, that I finally understood that
I did not need to stack up, but could just cycle to the next fig tree
whenever I felt like it. I became more picky though, plucking only from
trees that I could reach from the road without having to park my bike,
and then only from trees on the right side of the road. I took a ferry
again from the southern end of Pašman and landed in Biograd na Maru,
which was bursting with tourism. The Velebit Mountains, that had formed
a continuous backdrop on the eastern horizon ever since I had arrived in
Croatia, finally vanished, leaving room for a more hilly and somewhat
greener coastline. I slept in Srima, where I found a simple campsite in
the style of the one in Bibinje.

The next morning, I cycled up towards Krka National Park. The road was
very busy with cars bearing plates from all over Europe. I had wished to
reach the park earlier but a lazy morning and steep hills did not help.
I thought I could always decide to come back again the next day. I
finally reached a very large parking place full of cars, a few buses and
one bicycle (besides mine). There was a long queue to a little kiosk,
where I was surprised to discover that I had to pay to enter the park,
and more than a bit: 200 kn (about 27 €). Ar the same time I was also
informed that there were \"free\" buses to drive tourists down the last
hundred metres to the falls. I think it was the first time I had to pay
to enter a National Park. But what else to expect in a country where
tourist money is king? For a while, I thought of just turning back, but
curiosity took over, and I lined up in front of the kiosk where everyone
else had apparently decided that social distancing was not going to
happen here.

The waterfalls in the park were gorgeous. In a way, it was nice to visit
Krka in the middle of the day, because the forest and waters provided
comforting coolness. In other ways though, I was completely
desillusioned by what I saw. It turned out that the main attraction in
Krka is to bath in the river, which is of course a very special
experience. Yet along the short, one-way walking path through the park,
there are fifty or maybe hundred stalls selling anything from figs to
pancakes, and two restaurants. As a result, this unique natural site
serves, as pretty much all the rest of Dalmatia, the function of a
beach. And to get into the water, one has to first go through a silky
layer of shiny floating sunscreen.

Before visiting Krka, I thought that national parks were designated
spaces for nature conservancy. This was why, I thought, it is typically
forbidden to camp, pick up flowers or bring dogs in parks. But Krka felt
more like a place where nature was transformed into a money machine.
With thousands of tourists every summer day and virtually no trails in
the park besides the little wooden boardwalk around the falls, I really
wondered where all the money goes.

I bathed in the water or course (though I didn\'t put sunscreen those
days, one more advantage of wearing long sleeves). Since I thought
myself smarter than the other tourists, I decided to use my waterproof
backpack to fetch my camera closer to the falls. I carefully packed all
my clothes in the pack, and dived in. There were only two items I really
needed to care for and I managed to forget half of them. My backpack
also has little side pockets, which are absolutely not waterproof since
they are just nets. By the time I realized my phone was in one of them,
the screen was off, the casing really hot, and the led blinking in a
random, alarming way.

I walked back up to the park entrance, where I tried to dry my phone and
hoped it would somehow turn on, but nothing happened. I blamed myself
for having been so negligent, which added up to my negative feelings
about the park. Krka was the climax of the ugly tourism industry of
Croatia. A few days earlier, I still had tried to argue with Loran that
there was some good about tourism, that tourism was important to
international relations and global peace. Loran thought I was a
traveller, not a tourist. I was not sure to make a difference. But for
most people I met in Croatia, I was clearly just a tourist, and not a
very profitable one. Why would I not carry one more China-made Tiktok
t-shirt in my bags to start with, come on just one t-shirt?

When I cycled out of the park, my hopes that humanity would someday get
out of the current ecological and climatic crisis had taken a serious
blow. So had my last motivation bits to continue being a scientist. I
will write more about it in the next post, but for the moment I am still
trying to absorb the shock. Meanwhile, I cycled back to Šibenik, where I
quickly visited the city centre and obtained useful paper maps at the
tourist information centre. I did not feel like making much distance, so
I spent the night in Brodarica, which felt like the symmetric town to
Srima on the other side of the Šibenik bay. There were the same
repeating landscape of seaside bars and restaurants, the same doubtful
ATM machines dotting the seafront, and almost the same little affordable
campsite.

## More narrow streets in limestone cities

The next morning, I made good distance and reached Trogir, another
Adriatic island-town with more than two millennia of urban history.
Jewel of the Venetian Republic, the entire town centre is inscribed on
the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites as one of the best preserved
medieval complexes in Europe. I had planned to cycle to Split, but was
so impressed by the labyrinth of narrow streets and the used limestone
pavements, that I decided to spend the night here. I cycled to the
nearest campsite, which had almost thrice the price of the previous
night\'s, had no explanations on how to use a toilet brush, but where I
could pitch my tent right next to the water. In the evening, I climbed
up the narrow stairs to the top of the delicate bell tower of Crkva sv.
Lovre (St. Lawrence Church) to see the sun set over the red tiled roofs
of the city.

The next day, I cycled the last 25 km to Split. According to Wikipedia,
Split has the best preserved Roman palace in the world. *Preserved* is a
poor description of how the city looks like though. The city centre of
Split looks incredible. The Roman palace forms the first layer of a
complex architectural patchwork of all epochs of the last two millennia,
like a wall full of graffiti overprinted one atop another. The one
element that is persistent through this labyrinth of right-angled
streets and spontaneous arcades is the smooth yellow limestone,
ubiquitous construction material of all coastal Dalmatian cities.

Split was the largest city I visited since Ljubljana and I thought it
could be a good place to buy a new phone if I had to. In normal times,
when buying a new phone, or a new computer or camera, I would spend long
time reading online reviews and delay the decision for a couple of weeks
or months, until I am really very sure about which model I want and
need. And then of course be unsatisfied with it. In Split, I managed to
reduce this time to a weekend. Meanwhile, I placed my phone in a
zip-locked plastic bag with the rest of my *risoni*. After two days I
could see that the pasta had absorbed a bit of water and that there were
fewer droplets inside the front camera, but my phone still refused to
power on.

So I headed to a small phone store I had previously spotted and bought a
shiny new phone. Of course I was directly unsatisfied with it. The
device was technically really good. It was smaller and lighter than the
one I had bathed in Krka River, and the screen had a large brightness
range, which would allow for reading maps in full daylight, or
comfortably using the phone in my tent. But the system came bloated with
unnecessary software. I was planning to replace the original Xiaomi
software with Lineage OS (an open-source Android system) but this turned
out to be very complicated. One needed to create a Xiaomi account, apply
for unlocking the device and let them track you for a few weeks, and the
whole thing required a Windows computer, which I didn\'t have. So
eventually I had little choice but to accept continuing my journey with
one tech giant from each of both of the Worlds economic superpowers
competing for my attention in my pocket. During the few previous days, I
had embarrassingly realized how badly I depended on my phone. Of course
I could do without it, unlike my tent, quilt and bike which were, at
least in colder weather, indispensable. But I used my phone to contact
with friends, to write my blog, to book accomodation, to check border
status, and as a map.

Tech talk apart, the whole story made me really grumpy. I grew angry at
myself for having been so negligent to bring my phone into the water. I
had lost a lot of money, including three hostel nights in Split between
which I enjoyed little of the city. Eventually I decided to stay a
fourth night in Split, so that I could update my blog and enjoy a bit of
the city, but it didn\'t help. Instead, I blamed myself some more for,
in addition to all the rest, struggling to write the current post, and
being so socially incompetent, incapable to make new friends in a city
where I felt like one more tourist in the masses, an object to draw
money from, but not viruses. I still hated 2020.

## The route (4 days, 226 km)

-   19/08/20 [Bibinje -
    Gaženica](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/55240666) & [Preko -
    Tkon](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/55240858) & [Biograd na Moru -
    Srima](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/55240868) 89.3 km
-   [20/08/20 Srima - Brodarica](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/55241334)
    45.2 km
-   [21/08/20 Brodarica -
    Trogir](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/55241950) 59.8 km
-   [22/08/20 Trogir - Split](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/55242666)
    32.1 km

## Photos
