---
title: Bicycle touring during the pandemic
date: 2020-09-04 12:00:13.000000000 +02:00
categories:
- Cycling
- Tips
tags: []
header:
  image: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50209050481_98bfa520e6_w.jpg
  teaser: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50209050481_98bfa520e6_b.jpg
---

So you think 2020 is the worst year to go cycling about. Or maybe the
best. Or maybe you don\'t know. I see bike touring as one of the safest
forms of tourism for the pandemic season, and is a rather reasonable way
to enjoy this year\'s warmest months. Below I try to give a few thoughts
and tips on how to enjoy bike touring in 2020, based on my experienced
so far while cycling almost 3000 km from France to Montenegro.

## Protect yourself and others

This one is obvious. If you go cycling in 2020, you will need to carry
hand sanitizer and facial masks. I carry three fabric masks and
regularly wash them with soap and near-boiling water. At least within
Europe, as far as I can say, hand sanitizer is the ubiquitous product of
the year so I only carry a little flask and buy refills along the way.
While I did not use hand sanitizer at all during the lockdown, I find it
very practical on tour: washing hands is not always an option, and
sometimes I just don\'t want to leave the bike.

## Follow local customs

I was really surprised how social distancing and face masking customs
vary between country, or even from place to place within a country. The
country that surprised me the most was
[Switzerland](http://cyclingho.me/taking-a-break-in-zurich/), which
recorded a high number of COVID-19 cases but followed virtually no
social distancing measures. On the other hand,
[Slovenia](http://cyclingho.me/cycling-through-the-julian-alps-and-slovenia/)
and to some extent
[Croatia](http://cyclingho.me/cycling-about-croatias-krk-island/)
appeared relatively well-prepared despite having been little affected in
Spring.

When entering a new country, it may be a good idea to ask for the local
customs. The locals are typically well aware of the evolution of the
pandemic in their countries or cities, so I tend to trust their
behaviour. The only place where I did not follow what others did was,
again, Switzerland, were I was the only one wearing a mask in shops and
definitely felt stigmatized for it. Other than that, I generally felt
that adapting my behaviour, and trying to stay on the safer side, led to
better relationships with the locals. In any case, the rules of COVID-19
manners are not really different from the rules of travelling into
different cultures. Just open your eyes and ears, and in doubt, just
ask.

## No plan is the best plan

Many of us have had our plans jeopardized in the first half of 2020. So
this new strategy is what has worked best for me. I met several other
cyclists on the road who had cancelled their original plans because of
travel restrictions or fears to visit badly affected regions. During the
peak of the pandemic, I too cancelled my plans, loosing a lot of money
in the process. So when I began cycling in mid-June, I had no clear
plans beside cycling east, with the vague idea that I wanted to visit
the Balkans. Since leaving France I have seldom read the news. When
major waves of infection happened, as for instance during mid-summer in
Serbia, I always heard about it through others. As many European
countries are now on the brink of loosing or gaining control on the
spread of the virus, the legal situation is ever changing. Current
travel bans may be lifted in two weeks, and vice-versa.

## Prepare to quarantine

The best way to avoid getting stopped at a border or having to
quarantine is to tour within your country of residence. I found that
this is the option of choice for many cycle tourists this year,
especially those who need to get back to work or family. On the other
hand, if one plans for longer-term cross-country cycling, I think one
should be ready to end up in quarantine. My way to deal with this is
that I carry with me a laptop and a pile of blank notebooks. With these
items, hopefully complemented with a few bottles of wine, I know that I
will be able to keep myself busy if I end up locked for two weeks in a
hotel room.

## Enjoy slow travel

Finally, I think cycle tourism is one of the more responsible options to
enjoy this year\'s summer. In 2020, the effects of climate change are
more blatantly obvious than ever. But when cycling instead of using a
train or car (or plane), you\'re not only doing good for the planet, but
also travelling slower. If you were to get infected by the virus, and
used motorised transit, you would perhaps carry it to multiple countries
before noticing the symptoms. With a bicycle, unless you cycle in
[Liechtenstein](http://cyclingho.me/cycling-across-the-swiss-alps/) or
[Luxembourg](http://cyclingho.me/cycling-the-ardennes-and-luxembourg/),
there is no such risk. Of course, the safest option of all remains to
stay at home. But if you are travel-sick, there is no more hesitation to
have, just grab your bike, and then why not just start travelling from
your door?
