---
title: Cycling through the Ardennes and Luxembourg
date: 2020-06-29 16:00:21.000000000 +02:00
categories:
- Cycling Europe
tags:
- Belgium
- France
- Germany
- Luxembourg
---

After six days of rest in the French Ardennes, I repacked my bags and
took the road again. The well-paved and well-marked cycling road along
the Meuse River south to Charleville-Mézières and then east to Sedan
offered a rather direct route eastwards. But I had already cycled this
bit in the summer of 2019, so I chose to take another road instead. My
uncle Albert and cousin Émilie biked along with me back down the Meuse
River valley to Monthermé, where we met a friend Magali and had a
gorgeous picnic with too much beer. Though I passed the village on my
way in a week earlier, the weather was quite different this time. The
sky was clear blue and temperatures rising.

## The meanders of the Semois River

In Monthermé, we turned eastwards to follow the Semoy River, and
affluent of the Meuse. Albert and Magali kept me company for another 15
km to the last French village of Hautes-Rivières. We ate more cherries
and said goodbye. So I crossed the border to Belgium for the fifth time.
Suddenly villages were full of campsites, restaurants and souvenir
shops. I had tipped over from northern France to southern Belgium, and
it felt more like Côte d\'Azur. I felt dizzy from the beer, still
digesting the picnic while sweating hop. The road followed the meanders
or cut across them. After the uphill to a Rochehaut, a village
overlooking one of the many river loops, I finally felt like I had
digested lunch, and set up camp in the village of Poupehan near
Bouillon. Then I ate the last cherries, kept fresh in my thermos bottle,
and hurried into the river for a bath.

The next morning I woke up drowsy with a headache. I had gone to bed
worrying that I could have transmitted the virus to my grandpa. For some
reason I hadn\'t slept well. Several times through the night I had waken
to watch the stars or the twilight of the morning through the roof of my
tent. I was sunburned most likely just dehydrated. Mechanically, I
folded my tent and packed my bags, longing to feel the morning\'s fresh
air on my face. The first climb of the day to the perched village of
Corbion began to wake me up. After a coffee break by the old bridge in
Bouillon I felt ready for the day.

In Bouillon, I left the ups and downs and the twists and turns of the
Semoy River and began driving on long straight roads on the plateau.
There was less relief but I quickly found out that I was more exposed to
the winds, and to cars. My rear-view mirror was so useful. I had
revamped it a few days before leaving so that I could mount it on the
Surly\'s original bar-ends brake levers. This position was ideal to
watch the road over my rear left pannier. After leaving Lille I had so
quickly grown accustomed to it that I wondered how I had cycled so many
tours without one.

## The Abbey of Orval

The road then dove down to Orval, where the famous beer is brewed. I
imagined to find a small abbey in the woods but I was stunned by the
size of the buildings, old constructions of stone standing tall above
the forest. There was also a long double line of parked cars, and a few
touring bikes, the first I saw since I leaving Lille. Somehow it felt
good to know that I was not the only one to travel in these uncertain
times.

The visit of the abbey made for a pleasing digestive break after lunch.
The abbey grounds are busy but a one-way path of visit was set up to
minimize the coronavirus transmission. I encountered a family of
redstarts that probably set home in the building during the lock down.
After Orval I rode back up on the plateau through small sheltered roads.
The day was hot and the shade much welcome. I was glad to find spring
water at Bellefontaine, and a bike shop shortly after where I equipped
my bike with a third bottle and cage, very useful by this kind of
weather. I then cycled the last stretch to Arlon on not-so-pleasant busy
roads, before settling in for the night in a quiet camping in the
city\'s outskirts. I was tired but not exhausted. In the evening\'s
warmth I took time to take notes and process the day\'s photos.

## Cycling across Luxembourg

The next morning I slept well past daybreak and woke up in good shape. I
felt like the rhythm of bike touring was settling in. For the last few
kilometers to the border with Luxembourg, I felt like cycling in a
Windows desktop wallpaper: smooth roads, green pastures and small clouds
in the blue sky. Without even noticing the border, I definitely left
Belgium behind and entered my third country: Luxembourg.

I was not sure what to expect in Luxembourg. Despite being so close from
my hometown, I do not remember ever visiting the country. Finding my way
into the capital\'s city center was easy thanks to well-marked cycling
roads. The inhabitants had multiple origins and seemed to dress with
style. Parks and nature were abundant. In many ways Luxembourg reminded
me of Switzerland. The Alzette River cuts a steep gorge which is not
unlike the Sarine River gorge in Fribourg.

While I biked along the river and then through the wheat fields dotted
with flowers, clouds were gathering in the southern skies. By
mid-afternoon I had reached Shengen, where the famous treaty was signed,
and exited Luxembourg. From then on I had planned to cycle southwards
along the Moselle River up until its spring in the Vosges Mountains. But
my cousin had invited me to come by visit him in his new home near
Strasbourg.

For half a kilometer I cycled in my fifth country Germany, before
crossing again the border to France. Then the storm broke for real.
Skies were thundering right overhead, and rain pouring over me. The
contrast between the two countries became incredibly stark. I had just
entered a remote part of France. The rain and gloomy atmosphere of the
storm added to patchwork roads, weary houses and discoloured road signs
to feel like signs of poverty after prolific and sunny Luxembourg.

Right after entering France I fell miserably on the sidewalk after
failing to unclip my left shoe, scratching my knee and bar tape. Only
about half an hour later I abruptly paused under a bus stop to put on my
rain pant and failed again to unclip. This time the rearview mirror
broke. My proud repair works were gone and I became angry with myself.
This is when I decided to book a hotel for the night. I was tired of the
hills and just lazy to put up my tent in the rain. When I reached the
water divide between the Moselle and Saar Rivers, which is also the
border between France and Germany the rain finally stopped. So I let
gravity do its work and take me down to my hotel in the town of Merzig.

## The route (3 days, 247 km)

-   [24/06/20 Nouzonville -
    Bouillon](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/51976369) 60.3 km
-   [25/06/20 Bouillon - Arlon](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/51976372)
    90.1 km
-   [26/06/20 Arlon - Merzig](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/51976377)
    96.5 km

## Photos
