---
title: Cycling across Arcadian highlands and to Sparta
date: 2021-02-13 12:00:00.000000000 +01:00
categories:
- Cycling
- Europe
tags:
- Greece
header:
  image: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50841081488_e2a9bbb9df_b.jpg
  teaser: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50841081488_e2a9bbb9df_w.jpg
---

The docks were already bursting with activity when I pushed my loaded
bicycle onto the little ferry-boat, and climbed onto the cabin\'s roof
for a good dose of sun and winds. A strong breeze rose as the boat
exited the natural shelter of the harbour, a promise of headwinds on the
road. I said goodbye to Hydra, promised I would be back, someday.

*Note: sorry for the long absence. I am well and settled on a small
island in the Cyclades for the winter. I stopped cycling and slowed down
on my writing because of other projects. Please hang on with my
Mediterranean pace.*

## Healing centre in the hills

After a forty-minutes crossing, I was back on the Peloponnese, the
European mainland, and the realm of asphalt roads. I was surprised by
the cars parked on the land. In the last two days, I had nearly
forgotten about them, and now suddenly remembered that I would need to
share the road with them. And while I had not paid attention just two
days earlier, dozens of cars were parked here along the port driveway,
some apparently for a while judging by the flat tires and the eroded
paint. But for now, the seaside road pleasantly meandered along the
hilly coast, and made for a agreeable ride in spite of the wind. This
side of the Argolid Peninsula was quiet, and I was glad to be cycling
here rather than on the [much
busier](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-into-the-gulf-of-corinth-and-to-the-aegean-sea/)
northern shore.

I felt rested and energized. After an [uneasy
start](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-along-the-ionian-sea-coasts-of-epirus-and-arcania/)
in Greece, and the [racy
ride](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-into-the-gulf-of-corinth-and-to-the-aegean-sea/)
along the gulfs, I could tell how the ten-night break on
[Poros](https://cyclingho.me/taking-a-break-on-poros/), and then the two
nights on
[Hydra](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-around-argolis-but-no-further-than-hydra/),
had refilled my batteries. Even my brain seemed unusually active, as if
it had been waiting for the euphoria of the road as a permission ticket
to wander places future and past. My upcoming itinerary was unusually
set. I had four of five days to cover a good three hundred kilometres to
the port of Neapoli in the southern Peloponnese. I was glad that new
ferries had been added to the timetable, grateful that I had checked it
once more. I was excited for the road ahead, eager to see more of
Greece, and Crete, before heading to the Cyclades for a real rest.
Finally, I felt content that I would eventually get to see the Sparta
fault escarpment, a place I had [working on as a
student](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-around-argolis-but-no-further-than-hydra/),
and had not had yet had a change seeing outside a computer screen in the
thirteen years that followed.

Sparta, I thought once more, is one of the rare places in Europe where
an active geologic fault reaches the surface of the Earth. Together with
the Gulf of Corinth, it is also one of the most dangerous fault systems
in Greece, whose last major earthquake in 464 BC is infamously linked to
the onset of the first Peloponnesian war. Inevitably, these thoughts
brought me back two years past, to a morning that has remained one of
the most vivid memories from my year living in Japan. I thought I had
some kind of nightmare, awoke in great confusion. The bed was violently
swinging left and right and kitchen utensils collapsed in the cupboards.
It took me several seconds of stunned panic to take the measure of what
was happening, and some more seconds yet to wait for it to pass. My
first earthquake was unlike anything I had imagined. Then the city
lights disappeared and electricity went down, I would later learn, in
entire Hokkaido. For five million people in northern Japan, a very
unusual two weeks begun.

I remembered how we could see the stars in the streets, as clear as if
the city had been turned into an improvised campsite for two million
people in remote countryside. I remembered discovering the shocking
images of deformed streets and houses buried in landslides much after
the rest of the world had seen them. I remembered getting free cheese at
a store because the fridges no longer worked. I remembered how I had
developed earthquake sickness, feeling aftershocks even when they were
not happening. I remembered how I had lost focus from my work and
compulsively written a little program to check the frequency and
magnitude of aftershocks dozen times a day. I thought that I wanted to
write something about this experience. I thought I would be writing
about it in the Cyclades.

Two little passes in the peninsula\'s interior separated me from
Nafplio. I left the coast for an empty road climbing into quiet
countryside. It was already mid-October, but the day was getting hot,
and once again I could comfortably ride topless, eagerly cycling up and
away from the gulf shores through a wind-shed little valley. But after
fifteen kilometres of rolling hills and olive trees, the party was over.
The last three hundred metres to the pass were again on a major axis,
climbing steeply against headwinds, and with multiple blind turns. Soon
I became too busy watching for speeding cars in the mirror to think of
earthquakes or anything else. I took a break in a vast field of mixed
sheep poo and detritus at the top, before engaging in the downhill,
which was equally steep but of course much more fun. Eventually most of
the car traffic headed north towards Athens and I turned west on a
quieter road up the second pass.

It was mid-afternoon when I reached the sanctuary of Asclepius, an
ancient healing centre niched in the hills in the heart of Argolis.
There was a quiet little caf√© at the entrance to the archaeological
site, where I ordered a sandwich and a drink, and lazily booked a hotel
room in Nafplio. For once, I had done a little bit of research on
touristic attractions by the roadside. The ancient theatre of Epidaurus
was said to have such excellent acoustics that if a coin was dropped on
the orchestra, it could be heard clearly from anywhere in the theatre. I
did not believe a word of it, until a little group of French tourists
came trying this very experience. Not only could I hear the coin well,
but their conversations reached me crystal clear and their steps sharp
as drumbeats as I sat in the upper rows of stone.

The theatre of Epidaurus, an acoustic marvel dating from the 4th century
BC, could seat as many as forty thousand spectators. The rest of the
sanctuary, dedicated to god of medicine Asclepius, is unfortunately not
as well preserved. But strolling through the remains, I was surprised to
see how physical healthcare and mental healthcare were intertwined into
the building design. Pilgrims once came here for healing, which included
a number of rituals, such as bathing, drinking clear spring water, but
also taking a nap so as to be visited by Asclepius itself in your
dreams, and thereby receive clues that would be used for the diagnosis.
The theatre itself was integrated into sanctuary, and provided mental
healing through the watching of drama plays.

The last twenty kilometres to Nafplio were all downhill. Shadows were
growing but I did not feel the usual hurry to get settled before dark.
For some reason, this late afternoon felt different. There was something
uncomfortable about the light that made the day feel longer than usual.
And then I understood. For the first time on the tour, I had spent this
entire day cycling west. In four and a half thousand kilometres, the
only time I had cycled westwards was on a twenty-kilometres detour I had
made through
[Tarvisio](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-in-east-tyrol-and-carinthia/) to
avoid higher passes between Austria and Slovenia. But the weather was
cloudy then, and only now for the first time was I cycling straight into
the setting sun.

## Leaving the sea shore

On the next morning, I went for an early walk in the city. Nafplio was a
stopover I had been looking forward to, and I had thought of staying
here for two nights. But now that I was here, I found it unattractive.
This, of course, had more to do with my mood than the city itself, for
Nafplio is rich in remains from Venetian, Ottoman and modern Greek
history. But I felt I would rather be on the bike, or otherwise
somewhere quiet at the contact with nature. I climbed the long series of
stairs to the Palamidi castle, mostly because I felt it would be
outrageous passing by the ancient capital without at least doing that. A
man congratulated me as I reached the top of the stairs. I thanked him.
I could get a view on the bottom of the Saronic Gulf, and saw the
morning light land on the roofs of the old town. The old lady who ran
the hotel where I had spent the night spoke a slow-paced but
surprisingly fluent French, and she had invited me to stay a second
night for a cheaper price because she \"really liked the French.\" But
no, I wanted to cycle on. I passed by the hotel again, carried down the
panniers and left the keys on the counter.

For an entire other day, I cycled west into the wind. I finally circled
the deep end of the Saronic Gulf, and before heading inland into the
centre of the Peloponnese, had a late-morning swim on the pebble beach.
But when I picked up the miniature towel from my handlebar bag, I forgot
that the urchin skeleton I had found in the waters of Poros was wrapped
in it. The [only
souvenir](https://cyclingho.me/taking-a-break-on-poros/) I had allowed
myself to pick up fell to the ground and shattered in pieces. Gone. I
apologized to the urchin fragments for failing to carry them for more
than a hundred kilometres, and went for lunch.

The road had barely begun to climb when an unmistakable silhouette
appeared in the distance: a fellow bicycle tourist. I crossed over to
the left side of the road, and was greeted by a Dutch sexagenarian on a
week-long tour around the Peloponnese. We chatted, or rather shouted at
each other for a while, as other vehicles sped by on the long stretch of
straight road. He was impressed when I told I cycled from almost as far
as the Netherlands, but then told me about his own source of
inspiration, a cyclist from his home town who had been touring the world
for fifty years, and now neared half-a-million kilometres on the road.
The number seemed astronomical. I quickly calculated that it implied
cycling ten thousand kilometres a year. That seemed reasonable. But
fifty years, that felt like a very long time. I was warned of uphills
and the lack of water ahead. I thought about turning back to buy
bottles, but decided the three on my frame would do.

At the next intersection, I left the highway and, for the next twenty
kilometres, I was virtually alone. The road went up into a little vale
filled with olive trees. It followed the railway from Argos to Tripoli,
which had recently been disused and unfortunately seemed to be falling
apart quickly. A car overtook me at leisurely pace, and I felt like I
had just entered a parallel universe. Parts of Greece feel surprisingly
remote. If there exists anything here between major highways that feel
like racetracks, and deserted country roads like this one, I was yet to
find it. On such minor roads, I thought, I could climb hills forever.
The mental strain of [cycling busy
uphills](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-through-south-tyrol-and-the-italian-dolomites/)
is so strong, that hills like this one feel like a piece of cake in
comparison.

The road went through a quiet village in a topographic saddle, and
plunged back steeply into a valley already filled with afternoon
shadows. I pulled on the breaks and was grateful not to cycle in
opposite direction. The old railroad was taking extensive loops in the
hills to avoid steep gradients. I was surprised by the chill air, and
for the first time felt the coolness of autumn. For some reason, which
perhaps had to do with the temperature, or perhaps with the evening
light and the topography of the gorge, the downhill brought back a
memory of a few months old, as I cycled down from the [Black
Forest](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-alsace-and-the-black-forest/)
before crossing the Rhine into
[Switzerland](https://cyclingho.me/taking-a-break-in-zurich/). I
wondered if that was the last time I felt cold in a downhill.

At the bottom of the slope, I was faced with the choice to continue
cycling south into the Parnon Mountains, on promisingly gorgeous roads
through a pass twice higher, or west onto the Tripoli Plain and then
south on the highway to Sparta, saving five hundred metres of elevation
by using busier roads. Laziness took over and I turned west towards
Tripoli. Besides, I needed water. I had counted on filtering it from the
mountain creeks, but the rivers were still desperately dry and the water
filter I had bought in
[Zurich](https://cyclingho.me/taking-a-break-in-zurich/) remained as
useless as always.

Another good hour of uphills later, I reached another little pass just
in time to see the sun disappear in the hills, and a few seconds to late
to capture it on the camera. To the other side begun the Tripoli Plain,
a perched karstic plateau similar to those I cycled through in
[Slovenia](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-through-the-julian-alps-and-slovenia/).
Limestone and litter was poking from the ground everywhere. After
escaping onto a dirt road and then literally walking my bike over the
continuous line of abandoned clothes, plastic bags and house appliance
packaging that bordered it, I finally found a piece of flat ground large
enough to fit my tiny tent.

## Road anxiety overdose

I woke up early the next day truly feeling cold for the first time. The
night had been clear, so I had not bother setting up the rain fly. But
my tent and quilt were covered in morning dew, and I did not dare moving
out of the covers yet. I prepared a coffee, and resolved not to do
anything more until the sun would come up. It was nine degrees Celsius.
I had definitely camped in colder weather. One quickly gets used to the
Mediterranean climate.

Two hours later, I was already sweating my way along dirt roads on the
sun-drenched Tripoli Plain. A water fountain very timely presented
itself at a crossroads, and I could refill my bottles before the long
empty stretch to Sparta. Before even reaching the highway, I reckoned
from the noise it made that this would be no fun. I had checked that the
road had large shoulders before engaging in this direction, but the
traffic was heavier than I thought. As soon I engaged on the highway, I
quickly understood this would be one of my most unpleasant days on the
bike. Only a few hundred metres in, I could not help but notice a little
roadside shrine, commemorating a life lost on the road. As the highway
begun climbing, a dire scene soon boosted my fears. A mobile crane, a
fire truck, several police cars and an army of staff had gathered in a
road turn. An ambulance left the site as I came near. Some five or ten
metres below the road laid a car hung to the crane, apparently landed
here on its roof.

For a few kilometres traffic slowed down. But soon it seemed like
everyone else forgot about the car accident scene and sped up again. A
peculiar thing about road safety in Greece is that accident statistics,
or at least the deadly accidents, and there are enough to make
statistics, are actually written just by the road. Commemorative shrines
multiplied by the roadside. I had never seen so many of them before. Car
drivers and motor bikers probably drive too fast to notice, but with my
slower pace, I had plenty of time to consider the numbers. I first
estimated that there was about a shrine every kilometre, but soon
realized there were probably even more. Often only a few hundred metres
separated them. Sometimes there were several shrines in the same place.
Some of them were simple metal cases, some highly elaborated miniature
stone houses. I tried to imagine how the accidents happened, wondered
how many years had the road been built, how many drunk drivers were
passing me now, and if this road was the deadliest in Greece or if an
even deadlier one existed somewhere else.

I stopped for lunch at a roadside restaurant, which turned out to be the
only business on the entire highway. As usual I took a seat outside, but
soon I had to put on my down jacket again. The sun was high but the air
windy and chill. The fire truck I had passed a few hours earlier came
parking on the lot. Two men picked up take-away that had been ordered
for apparently more of them, and promptly left again. It seemed their
work was not finished yet. I cycled on.

For a good thirty kilometres, the highway was fairly remote, yet I was
shocked by the amount of garbage that continuously aligned on the
roadside. Along the entire stretch from leaving the Tripoli Plateau to
Sparta, I think there is literally not a single metre of roadside
without an item of thrash on it. On average, there is probably about ten
garbage items on either side per metre of road, with much higher density
in places due to wind patterns. Much of it is plastic. The road did not
pass a single village or business besides the restaurant where I ate,
but that apparently did not prevent some to carry their coffee cups and
water bottles for tens of kilometres before throwing them out of the car
window. At that point I think, Greece moved to the top position in my
personal ranking of countries with the dirtiest roads, ahead of the USA,
where at least there exist programs to clean roads.

Thinking of it, the road too often is a disgusting place. The road is
the place where all visit yet no one lives, and all appear anxious to
get somewhere else quickly. The road is a dirty place, a convenient
giant garbage dump soon left behind the wheels. The road is a place of
death, animal death and human death. The road is a place of anxiety, how
could it be called home then? As a bicycle tourist though, you spend a
lot of time on the road.

Eventually, I reached the intersection that I had been looking forward
for hours. I lifted my left arm, feeling like a turtle among the
motorized traffic. I changed to the middle lane, for what seemed like an
eternity, and eventually turned left and exited the highway. I breathed
out loudly, released my grip on the handlebars, raised my head to look
at the landscape, stretched my arms and my back. I parked onto an olive
tree and sat down on the talus. Time to relax. The land sloped gently to
the south-west. And then across the valley, the mountains rose again
sharply, jutting from the plain along a perfect line extending far to
the south, disappearing into a ceiling of grey clouds. I was facing the
Sparta fault scarp.

It was here, or rather in a computer model of here, that thirteen years
earlier, I had taken my first steps into academia. For a full month, I
had shared office with geologists from the *Universit√© Pierre et Marie
Curie* in the heart of Paris. I worked on a computer program and tried
to reproduce the shape of mountains formed by erosion and sedimentation
by a normal fault much like the one in front of my eyes. Rivers cut into
the scarp, forming steep V-shape valleys, and a triangle of steep land
between each. The slope of the triangle is controlled by rain, rain from
the glacial periods, when Greece was a wetter place. The project was
successful and became part of a scientific paper by my advisor. A paper
like those we read and presented in class, not without great effort,
fear and aversion, primarily for the fact these papers were written in
English, and English was very foreign then. But research was new and
fun. Geomorphology, the study of landforms, was fascinating. I wanted
more of it.

I had been looking forward to this sight for a while. The fault scarp
looked very much like it did in the computer model, with the steep
valleys and the triangles of land in-between. I expected I would feel
something, maybe say a last goodbye to academia and close that chapter
of my life, which had not been working so well after all. It would have
made a nice story. But none of that happened. I was angry and restless.
I still felt tensed from the thirty kilometres of anxious cycling on the
deadly highway. The new enthusiasm I had felt while [leaving
Poros](https://cyclingho.me/cycling-around-argolis-but-no-further-than-hydra/)
and then Hydra had been short-lived. Cycling had been fun, but on days
like today, it was only stressful and mentally exhausting. I was making
an overdose of road anxiety. Our children and grandchildren, I hoped,
would enjoy a quieter and friendlier road. But meanwhile in the era of
oil and speed, we cyclists are marginal animals, getting condescension
in the best of cases.

My body and my mind were exhausted. I did not feel like camping. I just
wanted to book a room for the night, and get there before the rain. The
fault scarp was cloudy and backlit, its lower part barely visible in the
shadow of the clouds. It was not even good for photos. Downhill.

## The road (3 days, 200 km)

-   [14/10/20 Metochi - Nafplio](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/57678746)
    90.3 km
-   [15/10/20 Nafplio -
    Partheni](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/57847518) 47.2 km
-   [16/10/20 Partheni -
    Mystras](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/57847530) 62.8 km

## Photos
